                                              COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS OF FINITELY
                                                           GENERATED GROUPS
arXiv:2002.02541v2 [math.GR] 2 Nov 2020




                                                                              EMMANUEL RAUZY


                                                  Abstract. We study systematically groups whose marked finite quotients
                                                  form a recursive set. We give several definitions, and prove basic properties of
                                                  this class of groups, and in particular emphasize the link between the growth
                                                  of the depth function and solvability of the word problem. We give examples
                                                  of infinitely presented groups whose finite quotients can be effectively enumer-
                                                  ated. Finally, our main result is that a residually finite group can be even
                                                  not recursively presented and still have computable finite quotients, and that,
                                                  on the other hand, it can have solvable word problem while still not having
                                                  computable finite quotients.




                                                                                Introduction
                                             The fact that several well known conjectures which have been solved for countable
                                          groups remain open for finitely presented groups, such as the Burnside problem,
                                          or the existence of groups of intermediate growth, shows that little is known about
                                          the specificities of finitely presented groups.
                                             One of the most striking results that affects specifically finitely presented groups
                                          is McKinsey’s theorem : finitely presented residually finite groups must have solv-
                                          able word problem. (McKinsey’s theorem, which appeared in [19], is in fact set
                                          in a more general setting than that of finitely presented residually finite groups,
                                          we are only interested in its group theoretical version, which was first made ex-
                                          plicit by Mal’cev in [18], followed by Dyson in [7] and by Mostoswski in [21].) The
                                          proof of this theorem hinges on the fact that the finite quotients of a finitely pre-
                                          sented group can be enumerated. However, it is known that recursively presented
                                          residually finite groups can have unsolvable word problem, and thus quotients that
                                          cannot be enumerated: two examples of these exist in the literature, one by Meskin
                                          ([20]), which is in addition center-by-metabelian, and one by Dyson in [8]. This
                                          proves in particular that there can be no Higman theorem for general residually
                                          finite groups: not all recursively presented residually finite groups embed in finitely
                                          presented residually finite groups.
                                             Before stating a precise definition of “having computable finite quotients”, let us
                                          recall the proof of McKinsey’s theorem.
                                             Consider a finitely presented residually finite group G, with a generating family
                                          S of cardinal n, and w, a word whose letters are elements of S ∪ S −1 . We try to
                                          determine whether w = e in G.
                                             First, as in any recursively presented group, we can apply to w an algorithm that
                                          will stop if it is the identity element of the group, and that never stops otherwise.
                                          This is done by enumerating relations, and their conjugates, and the products of
                                          their conjugates, and checking every time whether the word w has appeared.
                                                                                         1
2                                EMMANUEL RAUZY


   Secondly, notice that if F is a finite group, one can determine in a finite number
of steps whether F is a quotient of G: this is done by checking, for every generating
family of F of cardinal n, whether the (finitely many) defining relations of G hold
between those generators. Thus, from an enumeration of all finite groups by their
Cayley table, one can obtain an enumeration of all finite quotients of G. In each of
those quotients, we can check whether or not the image of w is trivial. If a quotient
is found, in which the image of w is different from the identity, we can conclude
that in G as well w must be different from the identity, and stop that procedure.
By definition of a residually finite group, any non-trivial element of G will have a
non-trivial image in a finite quotient, thus that second part of the algorithm will
always stop if w is not the identity element in G.
   This proof is the sum of three facts:
    (1) In a recursively presented group, there is an algorithm that determines
        when a word corresponds to the identity (and never stops otherwise).
    (2) In a finitely presented group, there is an algorithm that determines when a
        finite group is a quotient of it, and produces a morphism.
    (3) In a residually finite group whose finite quotients can be enumerated, there
        is an algorithm that determines when a word corresponds to a non-identity
        element (and never stops otherwise).
The first point is an equivalence and is well known. The last point is very natural,
and the definition of “residually finite group” could have been introduced to answer
the question: “what is a sufficient condition for a group whose finite quotients can
be enumerated to have solvable word problem?”.
   The second point is the one at the origin of this article, which consists in a
systematic study of groups whose finite quotients can be detected. Although several
articles ([4, 9, 13]) have already mentioned the fact that it is sometimes possible to
enumerate the finite quotients of non-finitely presented groups, the following was
never stated as a definition:
Definition 1. A finitely generated group G, together with a generating set S, is
said to have Computable Finite Quotients (CFQ) if there is an algorithm that,
given a pair (F, f ), where F is a finite group (given by a finite presentation) and f
is a function from S to F , determines whether the function f extends to a group
morphism, that is whether there exists a group homomorphism fˆ : G → F such
that for any s in S, f (s) = fˆ(s).
   If there exists an algorithm that terminates when the function f extends to a
group morphism, but does not terminate otherwise, we say that G has Recursively-
enumerable Finite Quotients (ReFQ).
   If there exists an algorithm that terminates when the function f does not extend
to a group morphism, but does not terminate otherwise, we say that G has co-
Recursively-enumerable Finite Quotients (co-ReFQ).
   Of course having CFQ is equivalent to having both ReFQ and co-ReFQ.
   It follows from the proof given earlier of McKinsey’s algorithm that all finitely
presented groups have CFQ. This fact should be compared to a result of Bridson
and Wilton from [5]: there is no algorithm that, given a finite presentation, decides
whether or not the group it defines admits a non-trivial finite quotient.
   This article builds upon Dyson’s groups from [8] to obtain the following two
theorems:
                        COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                                 3


Theorem 2. There exists a finitely generated residually finite group with solvable
word problem, but that has uncomputable finite quotients.
Theorem 3. There exists a finitely generated residually finite group with com-
putable finite quotients, that still has unsolvable word problem.
   We proceed as follows.
   In the first section, we give several equivalent definitions of CFQ groups, and we
explain how the profinite topology on a group can be used to describe the various
decisions problems that can be solved using McKinsey-type algorithms. The second
section quickly enumerates some easy properties: free or direct products of groups
with computable finite quotients also have this property, etc. In the third section
interactions with the depth function for residually finite groups are explained. The
fourth section provides examples of infinitely presented groups with CFQ: wreath
products of groups with CFQ and L-presented groups (including some well known
torsion groups). In the final section, we prove Theorem 2, thanks to Dyson’s method
which uses doubles of the lamplighter group, and give two proofs of Theorem 3, one
using the same technique, and another one that relies on Slobodskoi’s work in [23].
   Following [8], throughout this article, recursively presented groups will be called
re groups (for recursively enumerable), and groups in which there is an algorithm
that recognizes non-trivial elements will be called co-re groups. A group has solvable
word problem if and only if it is re and co-re.

                                    1. CFQ Groups
1.1. Equivalent definitions. Just as a group with solvable word problem is a
group in which words in the generators corresponding to the identity can be enu-
merated by an algorithm which respects a computable ordering on the set of words
in the generators, or a re group is a group in which these words can be enumerated,
but without any guarantee on the order of the enumeration, groups with CFQ,
ReFQ or co-ReFQ can be equivalently characterized by enumeration of their finite
quotients. Let us precise this.
    G is still a group generated by S, of cardinal n. S can be seen as {1, ..., n}.
    Call a n-marked finite group a pair (F, f ), where F is a finite group given by its
Cayley table, and f is a function from {1, ..., n} to F whose image generates all of
F . Consider an effective enumeration (F1 , f1 ), (F2 , f2 ), (F3 , f3 ),... of all n-marked
finite groups, which satisfies card(Fn ) ≤ card(Fn+1 ). (This can be obtained by
listing in order all possible Cayley tables, then listing all n-tuples from those tables
and determining when a tuple defines a generating set). Define AG ⊆ N to be the
set of indices k for which fk defines a morphism from G to Fk . Then G has CFQ,
ReFQ or co-ReFQ if and only if AG is, respectively, a recursive set, a recursively
enumerable set or a co-recursively enumerable set.
    Of course, those definitions are independent of a choice of a generating family.
Proposition 4. Having one of CFQ, ReFQ or co-ReFQ is independent of a choice
of a generating family.
Proof. Let S and T be two finite generating sets of a group G (not necessarily of the
same cardinal). Fix for each s in S an expression s = tα               αk
                                                                 1 ...tk , with αi ∈ {−1, 1}
                                                                   1


and ti ∈ T , that gives s as a product of elements of T or their inverses, and for each
t in T an expression t = sβ1 1 sβ2 2 ...sβk k that describes t in terms of the generators of
4                                 EMMANUEL RAUZY


S and their inverses. For a finite group F and a function f from S to F , define
the function f ′ from T to F by f ′ (t) = f (s1 )β1 ...f (sk )βk . The function f defines
a homomorphism if, and only if, f ′ also defines a homomorphism ϕ′ , that satisfies
ϕ′ (s) = f (s) for s in S. That last condition is an equality in F that can be tested
                                     αk
using the expressions s = tα   1 ...tk , even before it is known whether or not f
                                1                                                       ′

extends. Using this, all three properties, CFQ, ReFQ, co-ReFQ can be seen to be
independent of the chosen generating family of G.                                      

1.2. Variations on McKinsey’s algorithm and the profinite topology. It
was already explained, when discussing McKinsey’s original algorithm, that the
notion of residually finite group becomes a very natural one to introduce when one
asks for a sufficient condition for a group with CFQ to be co-re. We can more
generally search for conditions on a finitely generated group G with CFQ, that
might allow to solve various algorithmic problems. We will see that such conditions
can be expressed through the use of the profinite topology on G. In what follows,
we will say that we use McKinsey’s algorithm to mean that we enumerate all finite
quotients of a group, checking some condition in each quotient, and stopping when
a finite quotient is found that satisfies the required condition.
   Fix a finitely generated group G with CFQ (or simply ReFQ).
   We will search for conditions that allow, given two disjoint subsets A and B of
G, to distinguish A from B using McKinsey’s algorithm, that is to say to decide,
given an element of G that belongs to A ∪ B, whether it belongs to A or to B.
   The first condition we need is that, given a morphism from G onto a finite group
F , it be possible to completely determine the images of A and of B in F . We will
thus need the following definition:

Definition 5. A subset A of G is said to be determinable in finite quotients of G
if there exists an algorithm that, given a morphism φ from G onto a finite group
F , can determine the image φ(A) (i.e. solve the membership problem for φ(A) in
F ).
    A family (Ai )i∈N of subsets of G is uniformly determinable in finite quotients
of G if each Ai is determinable in finite quotients of G, and if the algorithm that
determines Ai in finite quotients of G depends recursively of i.

   Note, as an example, that a finitely generated subgroup H of a group G is
determinable in the finite quotients of G, because the image of H in a quotient of
G is the group generated by the images of the generators of H.
   The property of being determinable in finite quotients is interesting in itself,
however we will not give it much attention in this paper. We still remark the
following.
   It is easy to build a family (Ai )i∈N of subsets of Z, such that: it is uniformly
recursively enumerable, but not uniformly determinable in finite quotients of Z.
But a stronger result will naturally appear in this paper as a byproduct of the
proof of Theorem 2:

Proposition 6. There exists a recursive subset of Z that is not determinable in
finite quotients of Z.

Proof. See Lemma 33, disregarding the statement about the subset of Z being
closed.                                                                   
                      COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                             5


   On the other hand, it is easy to build a subset of Z that is determinable in its
finite quotients, but not recursive.
Proposition 7. There exists a subset of Z that is not re, but still is determinable
in finite quotients of Z.
Proof. For a function h that grows faster than any recursive function, consider the
enumeration 2h(1), 2h(2) + 1, 3h(3), 3h(4) + 1, 3h(5) + 2, 4h(6),... This defines a
set that is not re, but whose image in any quotient Z/nZ of Z is all of Z/nZ. 
   Given two disjoint subsets A and B of G that are indeed determinable in fi-
nite quotients of G, the profinite topology of G can be used to decide whether
McKinsey’s algorithm can tell them apart.
   The profinite topology on a group G was introduced in [11], it is the topology
whose open basis consists of cosets of finite index normal subgroups of G. We
denote PT (G) the profinite topology on G. A closed subset of G in PT (G) is
called a separable set. We note Ā the closure of a set A in PT (G). The following
easy facts render explicit the link between the profinite topology and McKinsey-type
algorithms:
Fact 8. A subset A of a group G is open in PT (G) if and only if for any element a
of A, there is a morphism φ from G onto a finite group F such that φ−1 (φ(a)) ⊆ A,
i.e. such that if an element of G has the same image as a in F , it also belongs to
A.
Fact 9. The closure B̄ of a subset B of G is the biggest set of elements that satisfy
the following condition:
        For any morphism φ from G onto a finite group F , φ(B̄) ⊆ φ(B).
   This shows that the closure of a set B in PT (G) is precisely the set of elements
that cannot be distinguished from B using McKinsey’s algorithm.
   We can now give conditions that allow two disjoint subsets A and B of G to be
distinguishable by McKinsey’s algorithm.
Proposition 10. Let A and B be disjoint subsets of G that are determinable in
finite quotients of G. Then McKinsey’s algorithm can be used to distinguish A from
B if and only if the following two conditions hold:
                                    A ∩ B̄ = ∅


                                    Ā ∩ B = ∅
Proof. This is a simple consequence of Fact 9.                                     
   McKinsey’s original result on residually finite groups can thus be interpreted
as an application of this proposition to singletons, and a residually finite group is
precisely a group in which all the singletons are closed in the profinite topology.
   Two other well studied families of groups fall in the range of Proposition 10:
conjugacy separable groups, and LERF groups.
   A conjugacy separable group is a group G in which all the conjugacy classes
are separable. It is easy to see that the conjugacy classes of a finitely generated
group G are always uniformly determinable in finite quotients of G (when a class
6                                 EMMANUEL RAUZY


C is given by any of its elements), thus Proposition 10 can be used to distinguish
conjugacy classes.
   A LERF group (for locally extended residually finite), or subgroup separable
group, is a group G whose finitely generated subgroups are separable.
   We then have the following proposition:
Proposition 11. Let G be a finitely generated group with ReFQ.
    – If G is residually finite, then it is co-re. If it is re and residually finite, it
      has solvable word problem.
    – If G is conjugacy separable, then there exits an algorithm that decides when
      two of its elements are not conjugate. If it is re and conjugacy separable,
      then it has solvable conjugacy problem.
    – If G is LERF, there is an algorithm that, given a tuple (x1 , ..., xn , g) of
      elements of G, stops exactly when g does not belong to the subgroup of G
      generated by (x1 , ..., xn ). If it is re and LERF, it has solvable generalized
      word problem.
Proof. All three points follow from Proposition 10, noticing that it provides a uni-
form algorithm, and using it respectively with:
      – A and B being singletons,
      – A and B being conjugacy classes,
      – A being a finitely generated subgroup of G and B a singleton.
In each case, one needs to use the fact that those sets are uniformly determinable
in finite quotients, which is straightforward.                                    
   Because re groups naturally have co-ReFQ (Proposition 16), the statements that
concern re group in the previous proposition could be formulated with CFQ instead
of ReFQ, without loss of generality.
   Proposition 11 follows in a very straightforward way from the definitions of
residually finite, of conjugacy separable and of LERF groups, and it is surprising
that the study of these properties was not followed by a systematic study of the
properties CFQ and ReFQ. The author could point the lector to papers where it is
implied that re conjugacy separable groups always have solvable conjugacy problem,
which led him to believe it has to be ascertained that not all recursively presented
groups, or residually finite groups, or even residually finite groups with solvable
word problem, have ReFQ.
1.3. Membership problem for finite index normal subgroups. In the article
[4], Bou-Rabee and Seward use, in the course of a proof ([4], Proof of Theorem 2),
the fact that, if a group G has solvable “membership problem for finite index nor-
mal subgroups”, (or “generalized word problem for finite index normal subgroups”)
and solvable word problem, then it admits an algorithm that recognizes its finite
quotients.
    We will now show that for re groups, having solvable membership problem for
finite index normal subgroups is actually equivalent to having CFQ. This will allow
us to give another point of view on groups with CFQ, and at the same time making
explicit the link to the isomorphism problem for finite groups given by recursive
presentations, which we will sum up in the next sub-section.
    When formulating the membership problem for finite index normal subgroups,
it is implicit that the normal subgroup is given by a finite generating family.
                        COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                               7


   Indeed, the membership problem for finite index normal subgroups in a group G
asks for an algorithm that, given a tuple (x1 , ..., xk , g) of elements of G, the first k
elements of which generate a finite index normal subgroup of G, will decide whether
g belongs to that subgroup. As opposed to that, when working with property CFQ,
we describe non-ambiguously a finite index normal subgroup N of G by a pair (F, f ),
where F is a finite group and f a function from the generators of G to F , which
extends to a group homomorphism, the kernel of which is precisely N .
   Of course, given that second description, the problem “does g belong to N ” is
solved by computing the image of g in F to see whether it is the identity of F .
Thus a group in which one can go from the description of a normal subgroup by
generators to a description of this subgroup by a morphism necessarily has solvable
membership problem for finite index normal subgroups. We will see that for re
groups this is also sufficient.
   On the other hand, given a description by morphism of the subgroup N , that is
a morphism ϕ : G → F with ker ϕ = N , one can always obtain a description of it
by generators, as one can effectively carry out the well known proof of Schreier’s
lemma, which is often used to prove that a finite index subgroup of a finitely
generated group is itself finitely generated. Indeed, if S is a generating family of
G, for any x in F and s in S, a preimage x̂ of x can be found in G, by exhaustive
search, and a preimage of xϕ(s) can be found as well, call it ŷ. Schreier’s lemma
asserts that the elements of the form x̂sŷ −1 generate N .
   This allows us to prove the following (the backward implication is directly
adapted from [4]):
Proposition 12. Property ReFQ is equivalent to having co-re membership problem
for finite index normal subgroups, that is to having an algorithm that decides when
an element is not in a given finite index normal subgroup, and does not terminate
otherwise.
Proof. Suppose first that G has ReFQ, and let N be a finite index normal subgroup
of G generated by a family x1 , ..., xk . Let finally g be an element of G, we want to
decide whether g belongs to N . Enumerate the quotients (F, f ) of G, and look for
a finite quotient in which the image of g is non-trivial, while the images of x1 , ..., xn
are all trivial. If g does not belong to N , such a quotient exists (the projection
G → G/N ), and this algorithm will terminate.
    Now suppose G has co-re membership problem for finite index normal subgroups.
Write hS|Ri a presentation of G. Let (F, f ) be a finite group together with a
function from S to F . As f does not necessarily define a morphism, we cannot
yet apply Schreier’s method. But if Fn is a free group with basis the n generators
of G, f does define a morphism ϕ from Fn to F , and thus we can find a family
x1 , ..., xk of elements of Fn that generate ker(ϕ). F is given by the presentation:
hS|x1 , ..., xk i. (But x1 , ..., xk generate ker ϕ as a group, and not only as a normal
subgroup as would be guaranteed by any presentation of F on the generators S).
    Now f extends to a morphism if and only if F satisfies all the relations of G,
that is to say if and only if the relations x1 , ..., xk imply the relations that appear
in R, that is to say if and only if hS|R, x1 , ..., xk i is just another presentation of
F . But this is a presentation of G/N , where N is the subgroup of G generated by
x1 , ..., xk . If f does not extend to a morphism, G/N is a strict quotient of F .
    Thus we can do the following: enumerate the elements of G, g1 , g2 , ... Then use
the membership algorithm for N , (which, as we suppose, can only show something
8                                  EMMANUEL RAUZY


does not belong to N ), to find elements that define different classes in G/N , that
is: find gi0 that does not belong to N , then gi1 which is such that neither itself nor
gi0 gi−1
      1
         belong to N , and gi2 such that gi2 , gi0 gi−1
                                                     2
                                                        and gi1 gi−1
                                                                  2
                                                                     don’t belong to N ...
If F is a quotient of G, this method will yield card(F ) elements, at which point the
algorithm has proven that F is a quotient of G. Of course, if F is not a quotient of
G, it will never stop.                                                                 

    In a re group, determining whether g belongs to the subgroup generated by
x1 , ..., xk can always be done when g belongs to that group, thus having co-re mem-
bership problem for finite index normal subgroups is equivalent to having solvable
membership problem for finite index normal subgroups. Similarly, re groups al-
ways have co-ReFQ (Proposition 16), thus for such a group ReFQ and CFQ are
equivalent. This yields:
Corollary 13. For recursively presented groups, having CFQ and having solvable
membership problem for finite index normal subgroups are equivalent properties.
   We can use this to show that in a re group with CFQ, from the description of a
finite index normal subgroup N by a generating family x1 , ..., xk , one can deduce
a pair (F, f ), where F is a finite group and f extends to a morphism ϕ of G to F
with kernel N .
   Launch two procedures, one is the same as that described in the proof above:
enumerate elements of G that define different cosets of G/N . We get successively
better lower bounds on card(G/N ): card(G/N ) ≥ 1, 2, 3, ...
   The other procedure gives upper bounds on the size of G/N . Start from the
enumeration of all marked finite groups (F1 , f1 ), (F2 , f2 ),... For each pair (Fi , fi ),
test whether G/N is a quotient of the group Fi according to one of the finitely many
left inverses of fi . This can be done because G/N is given by a recursive presentation
(as we add finitely many relations to a presentation of G which we suppose re), thus
there is an algorithm that tests whether the finitely many relations of a finite group
F are satisfied in G/N , and terminates when indeed they are. This procedure yields
upper bounds on the cardinal of G/N .
   At some point, the lower and upper bounds will agree, and we will know that
the pair (F, f ) that has card(F ) = card(G/N ) defines an isomorphism F ≃ G/N ,
and thus the normal subgroup N is described by the pair (F, f ).

1.4. Isomorphism problem for finite groups. Note that another condition for
CFQ appears clearly in the course of the proof of Proposition 12: at some point,
it is known that the presentation hS|R, x1 = e, ..., xk = ei is the presentation of a
finite group (even, that it is a quotient of the given group F ), and the question “is
F a quotient of G” is equivalent to “is this finite group a strict quotient of F ”. It
follows from this remark:
Proposition 14. A group G, which admits a presentation hS|Ri, has CFQ if the
isomorphism problem is solvable for the following family of presentations: all finite
presentations of finite groups, and all presentations of the form hS|R, R1 i, where
R1 is a finite set of relations such that hS|R1 i is finite.
   The isomorphism problem for finite groups is solvable, this is well known, but
it only means that we can determine when two finite groups given by finite pre-
sentations are isomorphic, and the question here is to determine whether these two
                        COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                                9


groups, one given by a finite presentation, and the other one by an infinite presen-
tation, are isomorphic. It can be seen that the finite presentations of finite groups
can actually be omitted in Proposition 14. If G is a re group which does not have
CFQ (and such groups exist, see Theorem 2), this shows in particular:
Corollary 15. There exists a recursive family of recursive presentations of finite
groups, for which the isomorphism problem is unsolvable. Moreover any two of
those presentations differ only by a finite number of relations.
   Since it was remarked that it suffices to be able to obtain lower bounds of the car-
dinal of the groups given by these presentations to solve their isomorphism problem,
the world problem is not uniformly solvable for this family of presentation.

                                 2. Basic properties
  We will now quickly establish some basic results about the three properties CFQ,
ReFQ and co-ReFQ.
2.1. Recursively presented groups. It is easy to see that re groups have co-
ReFQ.
Proposition 16. Any recursively presented group has co-ReFQ.
Proof. Let G be a re group generated by S of cardinal n. Let (F, f ) be a n-marked
finite group. For any relation r of G, write r = sα         αk
                                                      1 ...sk with αi ∈ {−1; 1} and
                                                       1

                                               α1         αk
si ∈ S, we again test the equality e = f (s1 ) ...f (sk ) . Since we suppose G re,
this can be carried out successively on all relations of G. If f does not extend to a
morphism, a relation true in G but not in F will eventually be found.              
   This is remarkable because it is more often the case that algorithmic problems
for groups be naturally re for re groups, than co-re (conjugacy problem, generalized
word problem, isomorphism problem for finitely presented groups, etc).
2.2. Hereditarity.
Proposition 17. If G and H both have one of CFQ, ReFQ, co-ReFQ, then so does
their free product G ∗ H.
Proof. Note that we have shown that those properties are independent of the gener-
ating family, thus we can show this using as a generating family of G ∗ H the union
of a generating family of G and of one of H. The proof is then straightforward, as
a function from that generating family to a finite group extends to a morphism of
G ∗ H, if and only if both restrictions to G and to H extend as morphisms.        
Proposition 18. ReFQ is inherited by finite index subgroups.
Proof. Let G be a group, and N a finite index subgroup of G. An enumeration of the
finite quotients of G gives an enumeration of finite quotients of N , by restricting
the homomorphisms to N . Not all quotients of N need arise this way, but add
the following: whenever a pair (F, f ) is found that defines a quotient of N , list
                                                                       π
all quotients of the finite group F , and when a quotient F → F0 is found, add
(F0 , π ◦ f ) to the list of quotients of N . We claim that all finite quotients of N arise
this way.
   Let M be a finite index normal subgroup of N . Then M is of finite index in G, it
may not be normal in G, but it contains a normal subgroup M0 which is both finite
10                                 EMMANUEL RAUZY


index and normal in G. Then G → G/M0 restricts to a morphism N → N/M0 ,
and M/M0 is a normal subgroup in N/M0 , and the quotient of N/M0 by M/M0 is,
of course, N/M .                                                          
   Note that any countable group embeds in a two generated simple group, and that
simple groups always have CFQ. This of course shows that CFQ is not inherited
by subgroups. Note that the author doesn’t know of a residually finite group with
CFQ, with a subgroup without CFQ.
Problem 19. Find a finitely presented residually finite group with a finitely gen-
erated subgroup that does not have CFQ.
   This problem is relevant in the search of a corrected Higman Embedding Theorem
for residually finite groups, i.e. in the search of necessary and sufficient conditions
for a finitely generated residually finite group to be a subgroup of a finitely presented
residually finite group.
   The following proposition provides insight into what happens when computing
the quotient of a group with CFQ.
Proposition 20. Let G be a finitely generated group. Let H be a group obtained by
adding finitely many relations and identities to G. If G has any of ReFQ, co-ReFQ
or CFQ, then so does H.
Proof. Let G and H be two finitely generated groups, with a morphism π from G
onto H. Let (F, f ) be a marked finite group. It is obvious that if f extends to
a homomorphism ϕ from H onto F , then f ◦ π extends as well to a morphism ψ,
which, in addition, satisfies ker(π) ⊆ ker(ψ). On the other hand, if f ◦ π extends
to a morphism ψ, and if ker(π) is contained in ker(ψ), then ψ factors through π
and f will extend to a morphism. The diagram is the following:
                                            π
                                      G    →    H
                                            ψ
                                           ց    ↓ϕ
                                                F
Thus if G has CFQ or ReFQ, we can reduce the finite quotient question of H to a
question about subgroups inclusion.
   If ker(π) is finitely generated as a normal subgroup, then the question “is ker(π)
contained in ker(ψ)?” can be solved in finite time, as it is solved by computing ψ(r)
for each r in a generating family of ker(π). If ker(π) is generated by an identity
-that is a set of relations of the form v(x1 , ..., xk ), where v is a element of the free
group on k generators, and x1 , ..., xk take all possible values of Gk - this question
can also be answered, because to check whether an identity holds in a finite group,
one only needs to check finitely many relations.
   If G is a co-ReFQ group, we can determine whether ker(π) is contained in ker(ψ)
even without knowing if ψ defines a morphism from G, and thus if (F, f ) does not
define a quotient of H, we will either prove that f ◦ π does not extend to a quotient
of G, or that, even if it were to define a quotient, the inclusion of kernels would not
hold. With this, all cases of Proposition 20 are covered.                               
   Since free groups obviously have CFQ, this proves again that finitely presented
groups have CFQ, and the improvement due to Mostowski [21] which asserts that
groups defined by finitely many relations and identities have CFQ. This implies for
                       COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                              11


instance that all finitely generated metabelian groups, while not being necessar-
ily finitely presented, have CFQ, because a result of Hall ([12]) implies that any
finitely generated metabelian group can be presented with the metabelian identity
(∀x∀y∀z∀t [[x, y] [z, t]] = e) together with finitely many relations.
   The following is a direct consequence of Proposition 20:
Corollary 21. The fundamental group of a graph of groups with vertex groups
that have CFQ (or ReFQ or co-ReFQ) and finitely generated edge groups also has
CFQ (respectively ReFQ or co-ReFQ). This includes free products amalgamated
over finitely generated subgroups and HNN extensions over finitely generated sub-
groups.
   A direct product of groups that have one of CFQ, ReFQ or co-ReFQ, again has
that property.
2.3. Groups with the same finite quotients. Although having CFQ is defined
for any finitely generated group, this property is very much attached to residually
finite groups, and not only because of the interaction between having CFQ and
having solvable word problem. For a group G, define its finitary image (the name
comes from [8]) to be the quotient of G by its finite residual, i.e. by the intersection
of all its finite index subgroups, or again, the image of G in its profinite completion
Ĝ. Note this group Gf . It is the biggest residually finite quotient of G. Note π the
morphism G → Gf . Fix a finite marked group (F, f ). This is the same situation
as described when investigating quotients of CFQ groups, except that we have the
property, which follows from the universal property of Gf : any morphism ψ of G
to a finite group F factors through π, that is for any morphism ψ to a finite group,
ker(π) ⊆ ker(ψ). The situation is summed up in the diagram:
                                          π
                                     G    →    Gf
                                           ψ
                                          ց    ↓ϕ
                                               F
  It follows that G has any of CFQ, ReFQ, co-ReFQ if and only if Gf shares the
same property. From this, the following proposition is obvious.
Proposition 22. If two finitely generated groups G and H admit the same finitary
image, then G has any of CFQ, ReFQ, co-ReFQ if and only if H shares the same
property.
   We say that a group has trivially computable finite quotients if its finitary image
is a finite group. For instance, simple groups, or finite exponent groups (because
of the solution to the restricted Burnside problem), all have trivially CFQ. Note
again that since a finitely generated simple group can be neither re nor co-re, CFQ
groups can have as bad algorithmic properties as desired. Obtaining groups with
CFQ that still have bad algorithmic properties becomes challenging only amongst
residually finite groups. This is what was obtained in Theorem 3.
   In [8] are constructed two groups with solvable word problem, the finitary image
of one is co-re but not re, while the finitary image of the second is re but not co-re.
This last group cannot have CFQ, otherwise its finitary image would have CFQ
while being residually finite, thus it would be co-re. Thus this is a first example
of a group with solvable word problem but without CFQ. Note however that this
construction relies on the fact that the constructed group is not residually finite in
12                                EMMANUEL RAUZY


order to prove that it does not have CFQ; while Theorem 2 provides a group with
solvable word problem and without CFQ that is itself residually finite.

     3. Relation with the Depth Function for residually finite groups
    In [3], Bou-Rabee introduced the residual finiteness growth function, or depth
function, ρG , of a residually finite group G. We briefly recall its definition.
    Fix a generating family S of G. Consider the function ρS , that to a natural
number n associates the smallest number k such that, for any non-trivial element
of length at most n in G, there exists a finite quotient of G of order at most k, such
that the image of this element in that quotient is non-trivial. This is the depth
function of G with respect to the generating family S.
    For two functions f and g defined on natural numbers, note f  g to mean that
there exists a constant C such that for any number n, f (n) ≥ Cg(Cn). It is easy
to see that one defines an equivalence relation ≃ by putting f ≃ g if and only if
f  g and g  f .
    If S and S ′ are two different generating families of a group G, the functions ρS
and ρS ′ will satisfy ρS ≃ ρS ′ ([3]). Thus one can define uniquely the depth function
ρG of the group G by considering the equivalence class for ≃ of a function ρS , for
some generating family S.
    The interaction between the depth function of a group and it having CFQ makes
it worth mentioning here, and in fact, an ancestor of the depth function can be
found in McKinsey’s original article, [19], where an upper bound for what would be
a “depth function” for lattices (partially ordered sets) is computed. This interaction
also appears in [4].
    Consider a residually finite group G, that has CFQ, generated by a family S. We
know that G is then co-re, because McKinsey’s algorithm applies: list all quotients
of G in order, and check wether an element has non-trivial image in one of those
quotients. How long this will take is bounded by the depth function. In particular,
if for an element w of length n of G, the algorithm has already tested all quotients
of size at most ρS (n), and not found a quotient in which w is non-trivial, then
w = e.
Proposition 23. Let G be a finitely generated residually finite group with CFQ.
   If there exists a generating family S of G and a recursive function h that satisfies
ρS ≤ h, then G has solvable word problem.
   If G has solvable word problem, then for any generating family S of G, the depth
function of G with respect to S is recursive.
Proof. The first claim follows from the sentence that immediately precedes this
proposition. The second claim is straightforward.                            
Remark 24. The depth function ρG of G is defined up to the equivalence relation
≃. In the statement of this last proposition appears the condition “there exists a
recursive function h that satisfies ρS ≤ h”. If two functions f and g satisfy f ≃ g,
and if there exists a recursive function h that satisfies f ≤ h, then of course there
exists a recursive function h′ that satisfies g ≤ h′ , and thus it makes sense to say
that there exists a recursive function that bounds the depth function ρG . Note
however that it is possible for a recursive function f to be equivalent, for ≃, to
a non-recursive function g, (and even worse: the equivalence class for ≃ of any
recursive function contains a non-recursive function), and because of this, the term
                       COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                             13


“recursive depth function”, must be manipulated carefully. In what follows, we will
say that a group G has recursive depth function if for any generating family S of
the group G, the function ρS is recursive. Proposition 23 implies that for a group
with CFQ, either all its relative depth functions ρS are recursive, or none of them
are. From this it is natural to ask the following problem:
Problem 25. Let G be a finitely generated residually finite group, and S and S ′ two
generating families of G. Is it possible that exactly one of ρS and ρS ′ be recursive?
  The following follows immediately from Proposition 23:
Corollary 26. For residually finite groups with CFQ, having solvable word problem
is equivalent to having recursive depth function.
    Theorem 3 thus asserts the existence of a group with CFQ but non-recursive
depth function. Note that result similar to this corollary exists, that relates the
Dehn function of a finitely presented group and solvability of the word problem in
it.
    In [14], it was shown that for any recursive function f , there is a finitely pre-
sented residually finite group with depth function greater than f , and yet with word
problem solvable in polynomial time. For such a group, McKinsey’s algorithm is
far from being optimal. The group constructed in order to prove Theorem 2 shows
that, for non-finitely presented groups, the situation can be even more extreme: in
it, the word problem is solvable, but not by McKinsey’s algorithm.
    It was explained in the first section of this paper that conjugacy separability and
subgroup separability, when confronted to the property of having computable finite
quotients, play a role similar to residual finiteness, but with respect to the conjugacy
problem and the generalized word problem. It is then natural to introduce functions
similar to the depth function of residually finite groups, but that quantify conjugacy
separability and subgroup separability. This was first done in [15] for conjugacy
separability, and in [6] for subgroup separability. What was said in this section
about recursiveness of the depth function translates easily to those two functions.

                       4. Examples of groups with CFQ
  In this section, we give examples of infinitely presented groups that have CFQ.
Those examples contain some commonly used infinitely presented groups.

4.1. Wreath products. The (restricted) L  wreath product of twoL
                                                               groups G and H,
noted H ≀G, is the semi direct product H ⋉ G, where H acts on G by permuting
                                             H                      H
the indices. The wreath product H ≀ G of two finitely generated groups is always
finitely generated, however, by a theorem of Baumslag ([2]), it is finitely presented
only if G is finitely presented and H is finite (excluding the case where G is the
trivial group). If hSG |RG i and hSH |RH i are presentations respectively of G and H,
with SG ∩ SH = ∅, then a presentation of H ≀ G is given by the following:
          hSG , SH |RG , RH , hg1 h−1 , g2 , (g1 , g2 , h) ∈ SG × SG × (H \ {1})i
                                         

(where by h ∈ H \ {1} we actually mean “for each h ∈ H \ {1}, choosing a way of
expressing h in terms of a product of the generators of SH ”).
  The following proposition gives necessary and sufficient conditions for a wreath
product to have CFQ.
14                                 EMMANUEL RAUZY


Proposition 27. The wreath product H ≀ G of two finitely generated groups G and
H has CFQ if and only if either H has CFQ and is infinite, or if H is finite and
G has CFQ.
Proof. Suppose that H ≀ G has CFQ. From the presentation of H ≀ G given above, it
is easy to see that H can be obtained as a quotient of H ≀ G by adding only finitely
many relations to it. Thus by Proposition 20, H has CFQ.
    Suppose additionally that H is finite. A finite group F , marked by a function
f , is a quotient of G if and only if the function g, defined as the identity on the
generators of H and as f on those of G, which thus sends a generating family of
H ≀ G to one of H ≀ F , can be extended to a morphism. But because H is finite,
H ≀ F is also finite, and thus it can be determined whether or not it is a quotient
of H ≀ G. This proves that G has CFQ.
    For the converse, suppose first that H is finite and that G has CFQ. Because H
is finite, a presentation for H ≀ G can be obtained by adding finitely many relations
to a presentation of G ∗ H, which has CFQ because both G and H have. Thus
Proposition 20 applies again.
    Suppose now that H is infinite and has CFQ. In a finite quotient of H ≀ G, some
non-trivial element of H must necessarily have a trivial image. But it is easy to
see, from the presentation of H ≀ G given above, that, for any element h 6= 1 of
H, the relation h = 1 together with the relations of H ≀ G will always also imply
that [g1 , g2 ] = 1, for any pair (g1 , g2 ) of elements of G. This implies that any finite
quotient of H ≀ G is in fact a finite quotient of H ≀ Gab , where Gab denotes the
abelianization G/ [G, G] of G. It thus suffices to prove that if H has CFQ and G is
abelian, then the wreath product H ≀ G also has CFQ.
    Consider a finite group F together with a function f that goes from a generating
family of H ≀ G to F . To decide whether f can be extended to a morphism, one
can first check whether the restriction fH of f to a generating family of H extends
as a morphism from H onto a subgroup FH of F , using the fact that H has CFQ.
If it does not, then f cannot be extended to a group morphism. If it does, one can
compute a presentation of FH . F is then a quotient of H ≀ G if and only if it is
a quotient of FH ≀ G. But G is finitely presented, being abelian, and FH is finite,
thus this wreath product is finitely presented, and a finite presentation of it can
be obtained from the presentation of FH . This presentation can in turn be used to
decide whether F is a quotient of FH ≀ G, and thus of H ≀ G.                             

4.2. L-presented groups. L-presented groups were introduced in [1]. An L-
presentation, or finite endomorphic presentation, is a quadruple hS|R1 |Φ|R2 i, where
S is a finite set of generating symbols, R1 and R2 are finite sets of relations, i.e. of
elements of the free group FS defined over S, and Φ is a finite set of endomorphisms
of FS . Such a presentation defines a presentation, in the usual sense of the term,
by adding to R1 ∪ R2 , as further relations, all elements of FS that can be obtained
from R2 by iterating the endomorphisms of Φ. (This process can be carried out
effectively, an L-presentation is thus always a recursively enumerable presentation.)
   It was proven in [13] that a coset enumeration process can be carried out in
L-presented groups, and that the membership problem for finite index subgroups
is solvable in L-presented groups. This, we have seen, directly implies that those
groups have CFQ.
Proposition 28. L-presented groups have CFQ.
                       COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                            15


   Many groups of interest that are not finitely presented were proven to admit L-
presentations, including groups of intermediate growth, and various groups acting
on rooted trees, like the Gupta–Sidki group (see [1]).
   Note that many of those groups were proven to be conjugacy separable ([24]) or
subgroup separable ([10, 9]). The fact that they have CFQ thus completes for those
groups the proof of solvability of the conjugacy problem, or of the generalized word
problem. (Although in some cases, solutions to these problems are known, that do
not rely on McKinsey’s algorithm).

                         5. Main unsolvability results
   In this section, we prove the two main theorems of this paper.
   Theorem 3 follows from the construction that Slobodskoi used in [23] to prove
undecidability of the universal theory of finite groups. However, the exact result
we use was implicit in [23], and it was first pointed out to hold by Bridson and
Wilton in [5]. We first show how, thanks to this result, the proof of Theorem 3 is
immediate.
   We then detail Dyson’s construction from [8], which, with [20], contained the first
examples of re residually finite groups without solvable word problem. We show
that this construction provides us with another proof of Theorem 3, which has the
advantage of relying on groups whose structure is very explicit. We finally use
Dyson’s construction to build a residually finite group with solvable word problem,
and yet without CFQ, thus proving Theorem 2.
5.1. Slobodskoi’s example for Theorem 3. Recall that the finitary image Gf
of a group G is its biggest residually finite quotient.
   To each finite presentation, one can associate a residually finite group, by taking
the finitary image of the group defined by this presentation. If π is a finite presen-
tation for a group G, and if Gf is the finitary image of G, say that π is a finite
presentation of Gf as a residually finite group, and that Gf is finitely presentable
as a residually finite group.
   In 1981, in [23], Slobodskoi proved that the universal theory of finite groups is
undecidable. As a consequence of his paper, groups that are finitely presented as
residually finite groups do not have uniformly solvable word problem. But in fact,
more can be deduced from the proof that appears in [23], as was made explicit by
Bridson and Wilton in [5]:
Theorem 29 ([5], Theorem 2.1). There exists a finitely presented group G in
which there is no algorithm to decide which elements have trivial image in every
finite quotient.
  Two other equivalent formulations of this theorem are the following ones:
Theorem. There exists a finitely presented group G whose finitary image is not
recursively presented.
Theorem. There exists a group H which is finitely presentable as a residually finite
group, but which has unsolvable word problem.
  This theorem then directly implies Theorem 3.
Proof of Theorem 3. A group which is finitely presented as a residually finite group
must have CFQ, by Proposition 22. Thus if such a group has unsolvable word
16                                      EMMANUEL RAUZY


problem, it satisfies the criteria required by Theorem 3. A group, finitely presented
as a residually finite group, with unsolvable word problem exists by Theorem 29. 

5.2. Dyson’s Groups. These groups are amalgamated products of two lamp-
lighter groups.
   The lamplighter group L is the wreath product Z ≀ Z/2Z of Z and of the order
two group. It admits the following presentation:
                            ha, ε| ε2 , ε, ai εa−i , i ∈ Zi
                                                 

The element ai εa−i of L corresponds to the element of Z/2Z with only one non-
                                                            L
                                                                       Z
zero coordinate in position i ∈ Z. We call it ui . Consider another copy L̂ of the
lamplighter group, together with an isomorphism from L to L̂ we note g 7→ ĝ.
For each subset A of Z, define L(A) to be the amalgamated product of L and L̂,
with ui = ai εa−i identified with ûi = âi ε̂â−i for each i in A. It has the following
presentation:
      ha, â, ε, ε̂| ε2 , ε̂2 , ε, ai εa−i , ε̂, âi ε̂â−i , i ∈ Z, aj εa−j = âj ε̂â−j , j ∈ Ai
                                                        

   Recall that the double of a group G over a subgroup H is the free product of two
copies of G amalgamated along the identity over H, denote it G∗H G. Dyson’s group
associated to A is thus the double of the Lamplighter group L over the subgroup
generated by elements of the form ai εa−i , for i in A. Call HA this subgroup.
   For n a non-zero natural number, denote L(A)n the group hL(A) | an , ân i.
   Call A mod n the set {r ∈ {0, ..., n − 1} , ∃a ∈ A, a ≡ r mod n}.
Lemma 30. L(A)n is finitely presented and residually finite. It is the amalgamated
product of two copies of the finite wreath product Z/nZ ≀ Z/2Z, and it admits the
following presentation:


         ha, â, ε, ε̂| an , ân , ε2 , ε̂2 , ε, ai εa−i , ε̂, âi ε̂â−i , 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1,
                                                                      

                                                      aj εa−j = âj ε̂â−j , j ∈ A mod ni

Proof. The given presentation is obtained from the presentation of L(A), adding
relations an and ân , and simplifying the relations as can be done. It then follows
from that presentation that L(A)n is an amalgamated product of two copies of the
finite wreath product Z/nZ ≀ Z/2Z. Finally it is well known that an amalgamated
product of finite groups is residually finite (see [17]).                         

   The properties of the group L(A) are stated using the profinite topology on Z.
A basis of open sets for PT (Z) consists in sets of the form n + pZ, for n and p
integers. Thus a subset A of Z is open in PT (Z) if and only if for every n in A
there exists an integer p such that n + pZ ⊆ A.
   We can now state the properties of the group L(A) that are relevant to this
work.
Proposition 31. Let A be a subset of Z.
   (1) L(A) is re, co-re or has solvable word problem if and only if A is respectively
       re, co-re or recursive.
   (2) L(A) is residually finite if and only if A is closed in PT (Z).
                        COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                            17


    (3) L(A) has CFQ if and only if the function which to n associates A mod n is
        recursive.
   The first two points of this proposition were proven in [8]. We still include proofs
for those two statements. The proof given for (1) is exactly that of Dyson. We then
give two proofs of (2), one shorter and more conceptual than that of [8], which was
suggested to us by the anonymous referee, and another one which, although not
as clear as the previous one, can readily be rendered effective, and in the proof of
Proposition 34, we refer ourselves to this second proof.
   Notice finally that the condition which appears in (3) could be stated as: A is
determinable in finite quotients of Z (see Definition 5).
Proof. We prove all three points in order.
  If L(A) is re or co-re, then clearly so is A, as n belongs to A if and only if
un = ûn in L(A), which proves one direction of (1).
  It is clear that if A is re, the presentation of L(A) given above is re as well.
  Suppose now that A is co-re. We can enumerate the complement of A, and thus
enumerate elements of the form:
                         (∗) w = aα1 x1 âβ1 y1 ...aαk xk âβk yk z
where αi , βi ∈ Z, x1 , ..., xk and y1 , ..., yk are elements of the base groups of
L and L̂ that have null components corresponding to indices in A, and z is any
element in L or in L̂. The elements written this way are exactly the elements in
normal form for the amalgamated product L(A). Recall that the normal form in
an amalgamated product ([16]) necessitates two choices of transversals, here one
       L                         L
for L/( Z/2Z) and one for L̂/( Z/2Z), and that an element in normal form is a
        A                          A
consecutive product of an element of one transversal, followed by one of the other,
etc, terminated by any element of one of these groups. But elements aα x, with α in
Z and x in the base L
                    group with null components on A, indeed form the most natural
transversal for L/( Z/2Z). Thus any non-trivial element g of L(A) is equal to
                    A
exactly one element in this enumeration. Ideally, we would then enumerate words
that give the identity in L(A), and listing words that can be obtained concatenating
a word in normal form to a word that defines the identity would give the desired
enumeration. Since L(A) is not supposed re, we cannot directly enumerate this
set of trivial words, but we will over-approximate it by a re set. For w as in (∗),
note Bw the set of all indices that appear in elements xi or yi of the base groups
(Bw can be empty). The over approximation consists of the words corresponding
to the identity in L(Z \ Bw ). Note that w is also in normal form in L(Z \ Bw ),
thus non-trivial there. Of course, Bw is finite, thus Z \ Bw is re, thus as we already
remarked, we can enumerate words (in a, â, ε, ε̂) that correspond to the identity
in L(Z \ Bw ). Then for any such word w1 , the product ww1 corresponds to a
non-identity element of L(Z \ Bw ), thus to a non-identity element in L(A), since,
as A ⊆(Z \ Bw ), L(Z \ Bw ) satisfies more relations than L(A). Thus enumerating
products ww1 with w1 = e in L(Z \ Bw ) will only yield non-identity elements in
L(A). What’s more, every element of the form ww2 , where w2 is a word that is
the identity in L(A), will arise this way, again because L(Z \ Bw ) satisfies more
relations than L(A).
   Because the algorithm that enumerates relations in L(Z\Bw ) depends recursively
on w, this process can be applied simultaneously to all words w in normal form,
18                                   EMMANUEL RAUZY


giving an enumeration of all words that correspond to non-identity elements of
L(A), thus proving that L(A) is co-re.
   Finally A is recursive if and only if it is both re and co-re, if and only if L(A)
has solvable word problem.
   This ends the proof of (1).
   We first sketch a conceptually simple proof of (2).
   Recall that the group L(A) is the double of the lamplighter group L over the
subgroup HA generated by elements of the form ai εa−i , for i in A. The statement
(2) is implied by the two following arguments:
       – the double of a residually finite group G over a subgroup H is itself resid-
         ually finite if and only if H is separable in G;
       – the subgroup HA is separable in L if and only if A is separable in Z.
Those arguments are easy to check, and because a second proof for (2) follows, we
do not detail them.
   We now give another proof of (2), which can be easily rendered effective. We in
fact prove slightly more than (2): for a subset A of Z, the finitary image L(A)f of
L(A) is L(A), where A denotes the closure of A in PT (Z). First we show that if
n belongs to A, then in any finite quotient (F, f ) of L(A), the images of un and
ûn are the same in F . Let (F, f ) be some finite quotient of L(A). Call p and p′
the orders of f (a) and f (â) in F . Then, because n belongs to A, n + pp′ Z must
meet with A, as it is a neighborhood of n. Thus we have k such that n + pp′ k ∈ A,
that is, such that un+pp′ k = ûn+pp′ k in L(A). Then, in F (we omit to write the
homomorphism onto F ):
                                     ′          ′           ′    ′
                       un = (ap )p k un (ap )−p k = app k un a−pp k
                          = un+pp′ k
                           = ûn+pp′ k
                                 ′          ′
                           = (âp )pk ûn (âp )−pk = ûn

This shows that L(A)f is a quotient of L(A). It is then sufficient to see that L(A)
is residually finite to see that L(A)f = L(A).
   We suppose that A is closed to omit the closure notation. Let w be a non-identity
element of L(A), and write it in normal form w = aα1 x1 âβ1 y1 ...aαk xk âβk yk z, as in
the proof of (1).
   Suppose first that the normal form is the trivial one: w = z with z in L or in
L̂. Then w is non-trivial in the quotient of L(A) obtained by identifying the two
copies L and L̂ of the lamplighter group (i.e. hL(A) | a = â, ε = ε̂i ), which is just
the lamplighter group itself, which is residually finite.
   We
    L can now suppose the normal form   Q has several terms. Each xi is an element
of     Z/2Z, that is to say a product uki,j with ki,j ∈   / A. Because A is closed,
     Z\A
for each such ki,j there is pi,j that satisfies (ki,j + pi,j Z) ∩ A =Q∅. Similarly,    for
each x̂i , introduce integers p′i,j , j = 1, 2, .... Call N the product pi,j p′i,j . (It is
                                                                            Q
1 if, for all i, xi = x̂i = e.) We claim that w is non-trivial in L(A)N . Indeed, N
was chosen so that for any (i, j), ki,j (or its remainder modulo N ) does not belong
to A mod N . This implies that w is also in normal form in L(A)N (by Lemma 30),
and thus non-trivial there.
                         COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                                  19


   Again by Lemma 30, L(A)N is residually finite, so we’ve proven that L(A) is
residually residually finite, which of course is the same as residually finite.
   Finally we prove (3).
   Suppose A mod n depends recursively of n. Let (F, f ) be a finite group to-
gether with a function f from {a, â, ε, ε̂} to F . To determine whether f defines a
homomorphism, compute the orders of f (a) and of f (â), and let n be their prod-
uct. If f extends to a morphism, this morphism factors through the projection
π : L(A) → L(A)n . By Lemma 30, a finite presentation for L(A)n can be found
from the computation of A mod n. It can then be determined in finite time from
this presentation whether f defines a homomorphism from L(A)n to F .
   Suppose now that L(A) has CFQ. Let n be a natural number. To compute
A mod n, consider all possible  Q            presentations for L(A)n : for B ⊂ {0, ..., n − 1},
define the presentation B :
         ha, â, ε, ε̂| an , ân , ε2 , ε̂2 , ε, ai εa−i , ε̂, âi ε̂â−i , 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1,
                                                                      

                                                        aj εa−j = âj ε̂â−j , j ∈ Bi
All these presentations define residually finite groups, and because they are finitely
presented, they have CFQ. L(A)n also has CFQ, because it is obtained from L(A) by
adding two relations, thus we can start to enumerate the quotients of Q      L(A)n . Also
start enumerating the quotients of all groups given by the presentations B ,Q    for B ⊂
{0, ..., n − 1}. Those 2n lists are all different (because, as the presentations B give
residually finite groups, a list contains a finite group in which the images of aj εa−j
and âj ε̂â−j differ if and only if j does not belong to B), and only one corresponds
to the list of quotients of L(A)n . It can be determined, in a finite numberQof steps,
which of those lists corresponds to L(A)n , and thus which presentation B gives
a presentation of L(A)n , and then one can conclude that B = A mod n.                  
   From Proposition 31, to prove Theorem 2, it suffices to build A with the following
properties: A is closed in PT (Z), A is recursive, there is no algorithm that takes n
as input and computes A mod n. Similarly, to prove Theorem 3, it suffices to build
A such that: A is closed in PT (Z), A is not recursive, but there is an algorithm
that, given n as input, computes A mod n.
5.3. Building subsets of Z with prescribed properties. We first give an al-
ternative proof of Theorem 3, before completing the proof of Theorem 2.
Lemma 32. There exists a non-recursive subset A of Z, closed in PT (Z), for
which A mod n depends recursively of n.
   Note that without the closeness assumption, this result would be a lot easier: it
is precisely the result of Proposition 7, whose proof is very short, and yields a set
that can be neither re nor co-re. However, for a closed set A, the computation of
A mod n will yield an enumeration of the complement of A: indeed, if a is not in A,
some open set a + bZ must not meet A, and thus a is not in A mod b. This proves
that if A is closed, and if A mod n is computable, then A is co-re. This is just the
translation for Dyson’s groups of: if G is residually finite, and has CFQ, then G is
co-re.
Proof. We construct a set B, which will be the complement of the announced A.
Thus it has to be open, re but not co-re, and for any a and b, the question “is a + bZ
a subset of B” has to be solvable in a finite number of steps. Indeed, a belongs to
20                                 EMMANUEL RAUZY


A mod b if and only if a + bZ meets A, if and only if a + bZ is not a subset of the
complement of A.
   Call pn the n-th prime number. Define two sequences (xn )n≥0 and (yn )n≥1 by
the following:
                                      x0 = 1
                                     xn = pn x2n−1
                                      yn = xn−1
   These sequences have the following properties:
      – for any n, xn |xn+1 and yn |yn+1 .
      – for any integer b, there is some (computable) n such that b|xn and b|yn .
      – pk divides xn if and only if k ≥ n, and pk divides yn if and only if k > n.
      – for integers k, k ′ , n, n′ , with k ≤ n and k ′ ≤ n′ , yk + xn Z and yk′ + xn′ Z
        are disjoint if and only if k 6= k ′ , and otherwise one is a subset of the other.
All these are clear, the fourth point follows from the third, by remarking that
elements of yk + xn Z are all multiples of p0 , p1 ,... pk−1 , but none of them is a
multiple of pk .
   Consider a recursive function f whose image is re but not co-re. Assume that
for any n, 1 ≤ f (n) ≤ n (it is easy to see that such a function exists). Then we
define B as the union:                    [
                                   B=         yf (n) + xn Z
                                      n∈N∗
Since f is a recursive function, B is re. It is not co-re, however, because ym belongs
to B if and only if m belongs to the image of f (this follows directly from the
properties of the sequences (xn )n≥0 and (yn )n≥1 ).
   B is an open set, because it is defined as an union of open sets.
   All that is left to see is that we can decide, for a and b integers, whether a + bZ
is a subset of B. Suppose that a < b. If a = 0, then 0 ∈ a + bZ, but 0 ∈      / B, thus
a + bZ is not a subset of B. If a is non-zero, no element of a + bZ is divisible by b.
Thus, because of the second property of the sequences (xn )n≥0 and (yn )n≥1 quoted
above, there exists N such that if N ≤ k ≤ n, then a + bZ ∩ yk + xn Z = ∅. Thus
a + bZ is a subset of B if and only if it is a subset of the set BN , defined by:
                                        [
                              BN =               yf (n) + xn Z
                                   n∈N∗ , f (n)≤N

Define a pseudo-inverse g of f by g(m) = inf {n, f (n) = m}. Because we chose f
such that for any n, f (n) ≤ n, for any m, g(m) ≥ m. If m is not in the image of f ,
put g(m) = ∞. The set BN can be expressed as the disjoint union:
                                       [
                           BN =              yk + xg(k) Z
                                   k∈Im(f ), k≤N

Because xk |xg(k) , BN is contained in the set CN , defined by:
                                        [
                                 CN =      yk + xk Z
                                         k≤N

It can be determined whether a + bZ is contained in CN , because the sequences
(xn )n≥1 and (yn )n≥1 can be computed. If a + bZ is not contained in CN , then it is
not contained in BN either.
                        COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                               21


   If it is contained in CN , a + bZ is contained in BN if and only if, for each k,
a + bZ ∩ yk + xk Z is contained in BN . But, because BN and CN are disjoint unions,
a + bZ ∩ yk + xk Z is contained in BN if and only if it is contained in yk + xg(k) Z. (If
k is not in Im(f ), g(k) = ∞, by convention yk + xg(k) Z = {yk }.) Now this question
can be effectively answered. If a + bZ ∩ yk + xk Z is empty, there is nothing to do.
Otherwise, it is of the form t + lcm(b, xk )Z. Enumerate f (1), f (2),..., f (lcm(b, xk )).
Either k is in that list, in which case g(k) can be computed and the question “is
a + bZ ∩ yk + xk Z contained in yk + xg(k) Z” can be settled, or k does not appear
in the enumeration, which shows that g(k) is greater than lcm(b, xk ). It this last
case, as xg(k) is greater than g(k), yk + xg(k) Z cannot contain any set of the form
t + lcm(b, xk )Z.                                                                        
   This Lemma allows us to give another proof of Theorem 3:
Proof of Theorem 3, alternate. It follows from Proposition 31 that the group L(A),
where A is the set constructed in Lemma 32, satisfies the requirements of Theorem
3.                                                                              
   This group has a depth function which cannot be smaller than a recursive func-
tion. We now prove the last lemma which ends the proof of Theorem 2:
Lemma 33. There exists a recursive subset A of Z, closed in PT (Z), for which
A mod n does not depend recursively of n.
Proof. Call pn the n-th prime number. Fix some effective enumeration M1 , M2 ,... of
all Turing machines. Consider the following process: start running simultaneously
all those machines, as is done to show that the halting problem is re. While running
calculations on the n-th machine, at each new step in the computation, produce a
new power of p2n : p2n , p22n , p32n ... If the computation on this machine stops after
k steps, end the list p2n , p22n , ..., pk2n already produced with pk+1
                                                                    2n+1 .
    Call A the set of all powers of prime numbers obtained this way. A is obviously
re, as it was defined by an effective enumeration process. It is even recursive.
Indeed, for a number x, if x is not the power of a prime, then x is not in A. If it is
the power of a prime of even index, say x = pk2n , then x belongs to A if and only
if the n-th Turing machine does not stop in less than k calculations steps. This
question can be effectively settled. Similarly, if x is the power of a prime of odd
index, x = pk2n+1 , then x belongs to A if and only if the n-th Turing machine stops
in exactly k calculations steps, this also can be determined.
    Of course, A mod m does not depend recursively of m. Indeed, the question:
“does 0 belong to A mod p2n+1 ?” is, by construction, equivalent to “does the n-th
Turing machine halt?”.
    Finally, we show that A is a closed set, which is equivalent to finding, for any x
not in A, a number y such that x + yZ does not meet A. If x has several prime
divisors, then x + xZ works, because any element of it has several prime divisors.
If x is the power of a prime of even index, x = pk2n , and x is not in A, it must
be that the n-th Turing machine stops in strictly less than k steps. Thus the only
elements in A that are multiples of p2n will have a valuation in p2n lower than k.
Thus x + xZ will also work. The last case is if x is the power of a prime of odd
index, x = pk2n+1 . In this case, we claim that x+ p2n+1 xZ does not meet A. Indeed,
x is the only power of p2n+1 contained in x + p2n+1 xZ, all other elements of it have
at least two different prime divisors.                                               
22                                   EMMANUEL RAUZY


     With this we end the proof of Theorem 2:
Proof of Theorem 2. By Proposition 31, for a subset A of Z, Dyson’s group L(A)
satisfies the requirements of Theorem 2 provided that A is closed, recursive, and
that the function A mod n is not computable. Lemma 33 provides such a set. 
   We finally remark that an upper bound to the depth function of the obtained
group L(A) can be effectively computed, and that the group obtained in Theorem
2 can be supposed to have recursive depth function.
Corollary 34. There exists a group with solvable word problem and recursive depth
function, that does not have CFQ.
Proof. It appears clearly in the proof of Lemma 33 that the constructed A is effec-
tively closed : if x does not belong to it, then some y such that x + yZ does not meet
A can effectively be found. Going back to the proof of the first point of Proposition
31, it appears that, given a non-identity element w of L(A), the recursiveness of A
permits to compute its normal form. Then, in the proof of the second point of that
same proposition, it appears that, from this normal form and the effective closeness
of A, some integer N can be effectively found, such that w is non trivial in L(A)N .
A presentation of L(A)N cannot necessarily be found, but there are 2N possible
finite presentations for it, all of them with recursive depth function. Taking the
supremum of those depth functions allows to compute a recursive upper bound to
the depth function of L(A).
   Although it is not clear whether that depth function is recursive or not, by taking
the direct product of the group L(A) with a finitely presented group with recursive
depth function greater that that of L(A), which exists by [14], one obtains a group
which still has solvable word problem and uncomputable finite quotients, and whose
depth function is recursive.                                                        
   In [22], we construct, also using Dyson’s groups, a residually finite group G
with solvable word problem, that not only does not have CFQ, but that also is
not effectively residually finite: there can be no algorithm that, given a non-trivial
element w, gives a finite quotient (F, f ) in which the image of w is non-trivial. This
is done by constructing a closed subset A of Z that is not effectively closed.

                                        References
 [1] L. Bartholdi. Endomorphic presentations of branch groups. Journal of Algebra, 268(2):419–
     443, oct 2003.
 [2] G. Baumslag. Wreath products and finitely presented groups. Mathematische Zeitschrift,
     75(1):22–28, dec 1961.
 [3] K. Bou-Rabee. Quantifying residual finiteness. Journal of Algebra, 323(3):729–737, feb 2010.
 [4] K. Bou-Rabee and B. Seward. Arbitrarily large residual finiteness growth. Journal fÃŒr die
     reine und angewandte Mathematik (Crelles Journal), 2016(710), jan 2016.
 [5] M. R. Bridson and H. Wilton. The triviality problem for profinite completions. Inventiones
     mathematicae, 202(2):839–874, feb 2015.
 [6] J. Deré and M. Pengitore. Effective subgroup separability of finitely generated nilpotent
     groups. Journal of Algebra, 506:489–508, jul 2018.
 [7] V. H. Dyson. The word problem and residually finite groups. American Mathematical Society
     Notices, 1964.
 [8] V. H. Dyson. A family of groups with nice word problems. Journal of the Australian Mathe-
     matical Society, 17(4):414–425, jun 1974.
 [9] A. Garrido. Abstract commensurability and the gupta–sidki group. Groups, Geometry, and
     Dynamics, 10(2):523–543, 2016.
                          COMPUTABILITY OF FINITE QUOTIENTS                                     23


[10] R. I. Grigorchuk and J. S. Wilson. A structural property concerning abstract commensura-
     bility of subgroups. Journal of the London Mathematical Society, 68(03):671–682, nov 2003.
[11] M. Hall. A topology for free groups and related groups. The Annals of Mathematics, 52(1):127,
     jul 1950.
[12] P. Hall. Finiteness conditions for soluble groups. Proceedings of the London Mathematical
     Society, s3-4(1):419–436, 1954.
[13] R. Hartung. Coset enumeration for certain infinitely presented groups. International Journal
     of Algebra and Computation, 21(08):1369–1380, dec 2011.
[14] O. Kharlampovich, A. Myasnikov, and M. Sapir. Algorithmically complex residually finite
     groups. Bull Math Sci, 7(2):309–352, mar 2017.
[15] S. Lawton, L. Louder, and D. McReynolds. Decision problems, complexity, traces, and rep-
     resentations. Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics, 11(1):165–188, 2017.
[16] R. C. Lyndon and P. E. Schupp. Combinatorial Group Theory. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
     2001.
[17] W. Magnus. Residually finite groups. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society,
     75(2):305–317, mar 1969.
[18] A. I. Mal’cev. On homomorphisms onto finite groups. Uchen. Zap. Ivanovskogo Gos.
     Ped.Inst., 1958.
[19] J. C. C. McKinsey. The decision problem for some classes of sentences without quantifiers.
     Journal of Symbolic Logic, 8(3):61–76, sep 1943.
[20] S. Meskin. A finitely generated residually finite group with an unsolvable word problem.
     Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 43(1):8–8, jan 1974.
[21] A. Mostowski. On the decidability of some problems in special classes of groups. Fundamenta
     Mathematicae, 59(2):123–135, 1966.
[22] E. Rauzy. Obstruction to a Higman embedding theorem for residually finite groups with
     solvable word problem. Preprint.
[23] A. M. Slobodskoi. Unsolvability of the universal theory of finite groups. Algebra and Logic,
     20(2):139–156, mar 1981.
[24] J. Wilson and P. Zalesskii. Conjugacy separability of certain torsion groups. Archiv der Math-
     ematik, 68(6):441–449, jun 1997.
   Current address: Université de Paris. UFR de Mathématiques. Bâtiment Sophie Germain. 8
place Aurélie Nemours, 75013 Paris, France
   Email address: emmanuel.rauzy.14@normalesup.org
