arXiv:math/9712269v1 [math.GT] 30 Dec 1997




                                             Algorithms for recognizing knots and 3-manifolds
                                                                                   Joel Hass ∗
                                                                             November 26, 2024



                                             1     Algorithms and Classifications.
                                             Algorithms are of interest to geometric topologists for two reasons. First, they
                                             have bearing on the decidability of a problem. Certain topological questions,
                                             such as finding a classification of four dimensional manifolds, admit no solution.
                                             It is important to know if other problems fall into this category. Secondly, the
                                             discovery of a reasonably efficient algorithm can lead to a computer program
                                             which can be used to examine interesting examples. In this paper we will survey
                                             some topological algorithms, in particular those that relate to distinguishing
                                             knots. Our approach is somewhat informal, with many details omitted, but
                                             references are given to sources which develop these ideas in full depth.
                                                 Given a question Q, a decision procedure for Q or an algorithm to decide
                                             Q can be thought of as a computer program which will produce an answer
                                             to Q in a finite amount of time. A formal description of an algorithm or a
                                             computer is given by the notion of a Turing machine. A Turing machine is a
                                             basic computational device that reads and writes onto a tape. The questions
                                             such a machine can decide are the same as those that can be decided by more
                                             complicated computers. The tape is divided into cells, which the Turing machine
                                             can read from and write to, one at a time. The tape has a leftmost cell, but is
                                             infinite to the right. A finite set of symbols can be written onto the tape - the
                                             usual English alphabet if we wish. The Turing machine has a finite number of
                                             possible states, and its behavior is determined by its state. Initially, some finite
                                             number of cells on the tape contain symbols and the rest are blank. At each
                                             time interval, the Turing machine scans the symbol at the current tape location,
                                             and in a manner determined by the symbol and its current state it: 1. Changes
                                             to a new state. 2. Overwrites the symbol it has read with a new symbol. 3.
                                             Moves the tape one cell left or right. Some states are final. The computation
                                             ends when they occur.
                                                 Q is called recursive if there is an algorithm that produces an answer in a
                                             finite amount of time. Showing that there is an algorithm to decide Q is equiv-
                                                ∗ This paper was completed while the author was visiting the Mathematical Sciences Re-

                                             search Institute in Berkeley in 1996/7. Research at MSRI is supported in part by NSF grant
                                             DMS-9022140.



                                                                                         1
alent to showing that Q is recursive. It is often easier to find an algorithm that
takes a finite amount of time to give a “Yes” answer to a question, but may
run forever if the answer is “No”. This does not establish that the question is
recursive. A rather different issue is the amount of time it takes an algorithm
to answer a given question. This is determined by its computational complexity.
Computational complexity is a measure of the difficulty of a problem, and can
have implications to a real world implementation of an algorithm, but is inde-
pendent of the decidability of a question. A good reference for the notions of
Turing machine, algorithms and decidability is [8].
    There are natural questions that do not admit any algorithm to decide them.
A famous example is the word problem for finitely presented groups. Given a
group described by a collection of generators and relations

                           G = {x1 , . . . , xm ; r1 , . . . , rn },

this question asks whether a given product of generators represents the identity
element. It was shown by Novikov and Boone that there are groups in which
there is no algorithm to decide this question. An exposition can be found in
[20]. Closely related is the question of whether a finitely presented group G is
isomorphic to the trivial group, which also cannot be decided by an algorithm.
Note however that it is easy to construct an algorithm which will answer the
triviality question with a “Yes” in finite time if the group is trivial. An algorithm
which constructs all products of relations and their inverses and checks for the
generators in this list will accomplish this goal. However this algorithm will run
on forever if the group is non-trivial, so it does not decide the triviality question.
    The notion of a classification is closely related. Define a classification of a
set of objects to be a list containing each element of the set once. Finding a
classification of some set of objects does not necessarily end its mathematical
interest. As an example, it is easy to classify the natural numbers.
    I am indebted to W. Jaco and G. Kuperberg for helpful discussions.


2     Topological algorithms
We will now consider the problem of classifying compact orientable 3-manifolds.
We seek a list containing each 3-manifold once, with the property that if we are
given a 3-manifold in some standard form then we can determine where on the
list it appears.
    While surfaces have been classified for some time, a classification remains
elusive for 3-manifolds. Markov showed that the Novikov-Boone results implied
that the classification problem for 4-manifolds was not solvable [15]. Given a
finitely presented group, a compact 4-manifold (or n-manifold with n > 4) can
be constructed with that group as its fundamental group. Markov showed that
a classification of 4-manifolds could be used to give an algorithm to solve the
problem of whether this presentation defines the trivial group, which we have
seen is impossible. While it seems unlikely that a similar type of problem arises
for 3-manifolds, it is still unknown whether they can be classified.

                                              2
    Here is an example of something that is not a classification of 3-manifolds.
All closed 3-manifolds can be triangulated [16]. Since there are only finitely
many ways to glue together k tetrahedra, we can construct all of these systemat-
ically. A resulting complex is a manifold exactly when the links of all vertices are
2-spheres, a condition that is easy to check. Throwing away the non-manifolds
gives a method of generating a list containing all 3-manifolds. The drawback is
that a given manifold appears many times in this list, and there is no known
method to decide whether two manifolds in this list are homeomorphic. How-
ever this procedure would lead to a classification if we could solve the
Recognition Problem for 3-manifolds: Give an algorithm to decide whether
two closed 3-manifolds are homeomorphic.
    The 3-manifolds are specified by the finite amount of data needed to describe
a finite triangulation. This data can be extracted from any of the standard ways
of describing 3-manifolds, such as surgery on a link, Heegaard diagrams, hier-
archies, etc. In dimension three the PL category is equivalent to the smooth
or topologically tame categories [16]. For combinatorial manifolds, a classifica-
tion is equivalent to a solution of the recognition problem. Given a recognition
algorithm, one can construct a list of manifolds using increasing numbers of sim-
plices, discarding duplicates by applying the recognition algorithm. Conversely,
a classification would give a recognition algorithm by comparing combinatorial
manifolds to those in the list. While the recognition problem in general is still
open, important cases are known.


3    Surfaces in 3-manifolds
A common approach in trying to understand 3-manifolds is to cut them open
along surfaces into simpler building blocks, and to understand the ways that
these are recombined to form the manifold. The cutting surfaces should reflect
the global nature of the 3-manifold that they are dissecting, or the building
blocks could become more complicated than the original manifold. It appears
to be counterproductive to cut open along a surface with lots of knotted tubes,
or with complicated self-intersections, since the cut open 3-manifold would be
more complex. To get simplified pieces, several possible cutting surfaces can
be used. Incompressible surfaces are embedded and contain no trivial tubes or
handles. Heegaard surfaces, a second important class, cut the 3-manifold into
two simple pieces, handlebodies. Even with these surfaces, careful choices must
be made for the cutting open procedure to be useful.
    Once one has decided on a surface to cut along, there is still a great deal of
choice. One could vary the surface in its isotopy class, perhaps creating fingers
which needlessly spiral around the 3-manifold. It seems natural to search for a
particularly simple representative in the surface’s isotopy class. One successful
idea, developed originally by Meeks and Yau, is to put a Riemannian metric
on the 3-manifold and find a surface of least area in the homotopy or isotopy
class of the surface [17][18]. It is a non-trivial result that a least area surface
tends to minimize its self-intersections, as well as being rather rigidly situated


                                         3
in the 3-manifold. In Thurston’s development of the theory of hyperbolic 3-
manifolds, pleated surfaces played a similar role. In the piecewise linear (PL)
context, where one has a triangulated 3-manifold, an attempt to push the surface
around until it becomes as simple as possible gives rise to what is called a normal
surface. These ideas are closely related - normal surfaces are the discrete analogs
of minimal surfaces.
    A triangulated 3-manifold is a decomposition of a 3-manifold into a union
of tetrahedra, which intersect one another along lower dimensional simplices.
We do not restrict to a combinatorial triangulation, so it’s not forbidden for
two tetrahedra to intersect along several faces or edges. We can also gener-
alize the triangulation to allow ideal simplices, tetrahedra with some or all of
their vertices removed. A neighborhood of a vertex could then be a surface
corresponding to a boundary component of M .
    Definitions: Normal triangles are disks in a 3-simplex which meet three
edges and three faces of the 3-simplex, and normal quadrilaterals are disks in a
3-simplex which meet four edges and four faces of the 3-simplex. An elementary
disk is a normal triangle or quadrilateral. A normal surface in a triangulated
3-manifold is an embedded surface in M which intersects each 3-simplex in a
disjoint union of elementary disks.




             Figure 1: Normal triangles and normal quadrilaterals.

    All four types of normal triangle can coexist disjointly in a 3-simplex. How-
ever as soon as one normal quadrilateral is around, the other two types of normal
quadrilateral can not be present, or else an intersection would occur.
    Definitions: A compressing disk for a surface F inside a 3-manifold M is an
embedded disk in M which meets F along its boundary. We call the compressing
disk non-trivial if the boundary curve of the disk does not bound a disk on F .
A surface with no non-trivial compressing disks is incompressible. A boundary
compressing disk for a surface with boundary F is an embedded disk in M with
an arc of its boundary on F and the remainder of its boundary on ∂M . We
call the boundary compressing disk non-trivial if the arc on F is not parallel
to the boundary of F . A surface with no non-trivial boundary compressing
disks is boundary incompressible. A non-trivial compressing disk can be used to
squeeze off a handle of a surface, a process called compression, as in Figure 2.
A similar process called boundary compression squeezes arcs on a surface into
the boundary of a 3-manifold, as in Figure 3.

                                        4
 Figure 2: A compressing disk for a surface and the result of a compression.




Figure 3: A boundary compressing disk for a surface and the result of a bound-
ary compression.


4    Kneser’s Theorem
A 3-manifold M which contains a separating 2-sphere can be cut open into two
3-manifolds with 2-sphere boundaries. By gluing in 3-balls to the boundaries,
we get two new closed 3-manifolds M1 and M2 . We say that the original mani-
fold is the connect sum of these two manifolds, M = M1 #M2 , which are called
the summands. This operation is well defined and associative if each manifold
is oriented and the gluing map of the two 2-spheres is required to reverse ori-
entation. If the 2-sphere bounds a ball, then one summand is homeomorphic
to M and the other to the 3-sphere. This decomposition is called trivial. The
question arises whether it’s possible to keep on splitting M indefinitely in a
non-trivial way, into more and more pieces.
    Normal surfaces were introduced by Kneser, who used them to prove the
following result [13].

Theorem 1 Let M be a triangulated 3-manifold with t 3-simplices and let
k(M ) = dim(H1 (M ; Z2 )) + dim(H1 (M ; Z)) + 6t. Them M can be decomposed
non-trivially along 2-spheres into at most k(M ) pieces.

   Suppose we have a collection of disjoint embedded 2-spheres in M . We will
put the 2-spheres in a rigid position, making each of them a special type of
surface.
   In fact we will show that any embedded surface, not necessarily connected,


                                      5
can be compressed and isotoped to a union (possibly empty) of normal surfaces.
To do so we introduce a notion of how complex a surface is relative to a given
triangulation. The weight w(F ) of a surface F is the number of times it intersects
the 1-skeleton of M . Weight gives an analog of area in the PL context. It equals
the area in the limiting case when all area measure is concentrated near the 1-
skeleton.

Lemma 2 Let F be an embedded surface in M . Then after a series of com-
pressions, isotopies and removal of trivial 2-spheres, F becomes isotopic to a
union (possibly empty) of disjoint normal surfaces.

Proof: Consider the intersection of F with the triangulation. After a slight
perturbation of F , we can assume this intersection is transverse. We will simplify
the intersection by a process which we call normalization.
    F intersects the interior of a tetrahedron T in a collection of subsurfaces
F ∩T , with boundary a collection of disjoint simple closed curves. The boundary
of T is a 2-sphere, and each simple closed curve in F ∩∂T cuts ∂T into two disks.
By applying the Loop Theorem of Papakyriakopoulous [19] [6], we can find a
series of compressions in T which yield a new surface, all of whose components
meet T in disks and 2-spheres. Since T is a ball, and therefore irreducible,
the 2-sphere components are trivial and can be discarded. The weight does
not increase in this process, though the number of components of F may rise.
Repeating for each tetrahedra, we arrive at a surface F1 of no higher weight
with every curve in F1 ∩ ∂T bounding a disk in T .
    If a curve in F1 ∩ ∂T lies completely inside a face of T , then we can isotop
the disk it bounds in T across that face and eliminate the curve, as well as any
curves that lie inside it on the face. Repeating for other tetrahedra, we can
assume that no such curves exist in a face of any tetrahedron.
    Now suppose that there is a curve δ of F1 ∩ ∂T that meets an edge of T in
more than one point. If we consider all points of intersection of that edge with
F1 , we can find an adjacent pair of points which lies on one curve of F1 ∩ ∂T .
These points can be connected by an arc on F1 ∩ T whose interior is in the
interior of T . We can isotop this arc on F1 across the edge segment between
these two points, reducing the weight of F1 by two.




     Figure 4: An isotopy across an edge of a tetrahedron reduces weight.



                                        6
    Repeating in all the tetrahedra, we arrive at a surface whose curves of inter-
section with the boundary of any tetrahedron meet each edge at most once. A
disk in a tetrahedron whose boundary meets each edge at most once can only
be a normal triangle or quadrilateral. The resulting surface is a disjoint union
of normal surfaces and surfaces completely contained in a single tetrahedron.
These latter surfaces can be compressed to give trivial 2-spheres by an appli-
cation of the Loop Theorem, and the trivial 2-spheres can then be removed,
leaving a normal surface as claimed.
    To illustrate the close connection between normal surfaces and minimal sur-
faces, we now state an important theorem of W. Meeks, L. Simon and S.T. Yau
[18]. Lemma 2 is essentially the same theorem in the PL context.
Theorem 3 Let F be an embedded surface in a Riemannian 3-manifold M .
Then after a series of compressions, isotopies, and collapsing of the boundary
of an I-bundle to its core, F can be realized as a union (possibly empty) of
disjoint embedded minimal surfaces.
    The extra process of collapsing I-bundles can be seen in the Mobius band,
where a shortest curve isotopic to the boundary can be homotoped to double
cover the core. In the Riemannian setting, the metric may force the minimizer
to be a double cover. In the PL setting, this type of collapse is not necessary,
even where it is possible.
    Each 3-simplex contains four distinct types of normal triangle and three
types of quadrilaterals. A good way to keep track of them is to notice that each
normal triangle cuts off a unique vertex, and each normal quadrilateral separates
one opposite pair of edges of the 3-simplex. In a given 3-simplex, a union of
normal triangles and quadrilaterals can contain at most five types, - up to four
triangles and at most one quadrilateral. Of course many parallel copies of one
of the disk types can occur without causing intersections. The complementary
regions in the 3-simplex consist of a collection of product regions, {triangle}×I or
{quadrilateral}×I, together with at most six exceptional regions, which are not
products. The exceptional regions meet either a vertex or at least two distinct
disk types. The two tetrahedra in Figure 1 contain five and two exceptional
regions respectively.
    Proof of Kneser’s Theorem: Let {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn } be disjoint 2-spheres
in M , no subset of which bounds a ball with some open balls removed, which we
call a punctured ball. Let F denote their union, and apply Lemma 2 to F . Then
we can isotope and compress to obtain a normal surface. A compression causes a
2-sphere S to be split into two 2-spheres S1 and S2 . The property that no subset
of the set of spheres bounds a ball may not be preserved after the compression.
However if S1 together with some other spheres bounds a punctured ball B1 ,
and S2 together with some other spheres bounds a punctured ball B2 , then
S together with some other spheres also bounds a punctured ball. So we can
replace S by one of S1 and S2 and get a new set of spheres still having the
property that no subset bounds a punctured ball. Repeating, we arrive at a
collection of normal 2-spheres with this property which is as large as the initial
collection.

                                         7
    We now show that if there are more than k(M ) disjoint normal 2-spheres,
then a subset bounds a punctured ball, which implies there is a trivial S 3 sum-
mand in the decomposition they define. Each tetrahedron contains at most
6 non-product regions. The number of components of M − F which are not
built entirely out of product regions is bounded by 6t. The product region
components of M − F are I-bundles with boundary a 2-sphere, and are either
homeomorphic to S 2 × I or to a non-trivial I-bundle over an embedded pro-
jective plane in M . Each of the latter components contributes an RP 3 to the
connect sum decomposition of M , and a generator to H1 (M ; Z2 ). So the num-
ber of components of the complement of the collection of 2-spheres is bounded
by H1 (M ; Z2 ) + 6t. This gives a bound to the number of separating 2-spheres
in our collection. The number of non-parallel disjoint non-separating 2-spheres
is bounded by H1 (M ; Z). So if the number of 2-spheres is greater than k(M )
then some subset of them must bound a punctured ball.
    Kneser’s Theorem led to the establishment by Milnor of a unique factoriza-
tion theorem for 3-manifolds into prime pieces. See [6] for an exposition.
    An almost identical argument proves a theorem of Haken [3].

Theorem 4 Let M be a triangulated 3-manifold with t 3-simplices and let
k(M ) = dim(H1 (M ; Z2 )) + dim(H1 (M ; Z)) + 6t. Then M contains at most
k(M ) disjoint, non-parallel, incompressible surfaces.


5     Recognizing the unknot.
Haken realized that the theory of normal surfaces had powerful applications in
the study of 3-manifolds. He used them in two important ways.
    1. To establish finiteness results about the number of ways in which mani-
       folds can be cut open along surfaces other than 2-spheres. Haken showed
       that cutting manifolds open along suitably chosen incompressible surfaces
       resulted in a process which terminated after a finite number of steps [3].
       Incompressible surfaces have assumed a central role in the theory of 3-
       manifolds. The 3-manifolds which are irreducible and which contain in-
       compressible surfaces are called Haken manifolds.
    2. To give algorithms to solve problems in 3-dimensional topology.
    We will concentrate on the second contribution, and describe Haken’s algo-
rithm to recognize the unknot among the knots in the 3-sphere [2].
    A knot is the unknot if it bounds an embedded disk in S 3 . The algorithm
will search for this disk, and either produce it or show it does not exist in a finite
amount of time. In fact, the same algorithm can find an embedded surface of
smallest genus whose boundary is the knot, giving the genus of the know. The
knot is the unknot if and only if this smallest genus surface is a disk. The surface
will be described as a normal surface.
    To allow this, we need to extend the notion of normal surface to surfaces and
3-manifolds with boundary. The definitions and pictures are the same, except

                                          8
that some faces of some tetrahedra lie on the boundary of the 3-manifold, giving
a triangulation of the boundary. Lemma 2 generalizes with the extra operation
of boundary compression.
    To get started, we need to describe a 3-manifold and a surface with a finite
amount of data. A 3-manifold is described nicely by a triangulation. The data is
a finite set of vertices, and finite sets of pairs, triples and quadruples of vertices
representing edges, faces and 3-simplices. There are some obvious conditions,
such as that the three pairs constructed from a triple of vertices representing a
face must occur as edges. We allow these sets of vertices to contain a vertex or
edge more than once, since our 3-simplices are not required to be combinatorial.
    Describing a surface will need some additional data. Taking advantage of
Lemma 2, we work with normal surfaces. For each tetrahedron we have seven
types of normal triangles and quadrilaterals. Assign to the 7t disk types found
in the 3-manifold the labels {σi } and let xi denote the multiplicity with which
the disk type σi occurs, 1 ≤ i ≤ 7t. The vector of non-negative integers xi
completely determines any embedded normal surface.
    We now ask which non-negative integer vectors xi give rise to a normal
surface. Two conditions must be met.
   1. Each tetrahedron contains at most one type of quadrilateral. This is called
      the quadrilateral condition.
   2. The disks must match up across a face separating two tetrahedra.
The first condition means that if certain σi have non-zero coefficients, then oth-
ers must have zero coefficients. The second means that the number of quadri-
laterals and triangles in a tetrahedron having a given arc of intersection with a
particular triangular face must equal the corresponding sum in the tetrahedron
adjacent across that face. Since each arc on a triangular face of a tetrahedron
can be part of the boundary of exactly one type of normal triangle and one type
of normal quadrilateral, this leads to equations of the form xi1 + xi2 = xi3 + xi4 .
These linear equations are called the matching equations. There are three of
them for each pair of tetrahedral faces which are glued to one another. To-
gether with the conditions 0 ≤ xi we call them the normal surface equations.
There are no matching equations associated to boundary faces. Solutions of the
normal surface equations can have boundaries contained in these faces. If the
quadrilateral condition and the normal surface equations hold, then the integers
xi give a unique embedded normal surface, constructed by gluing together the
normal triangles and quadrilaterals in the unique way giving an embedding. We
denote by X the vector of non-negative integers (x1 , x2 . . . , xn ), and also use X
to denote the embedded normal surface made from the union of xi copies of the
normal piece σi .
    Two normal surfaces A and B may intersect one another. A surface C is
obtained by taking their union and doing an operation called regular exchange.
This involves cutting and pasting along double curves so as to preserve the
property that all disks are normal. There is always a unique way to cut and
paste two normal disks intersecting along an arc to obtain a pair of disjoint

                                          9
         Figure 5: Elementary disks in adjacent tetrahedra match up.


normal disks, unless they are non-parallel quadrilaterals. In that case no choice
will give normal disks.




             Figure 6: A regular exchange keeps all disks normal.


Lemma 5 If A, B, C are solutions of the normal surface equations with A+B =
C, and C gives rise to an embedded normal surface, then so do A and B.
Furthermore, χ(C) = χ(A) + χ(B) and w(C) = w(A) + w(B).

Proof: If C corresponds to an embedded surface then it satisfies the quadri-
lateral condition, so it doesn’t contain intersecting quadrilaterals, and neither
do A or B. We can calculate the Euler characteristic of C by counting vertices,
edges and faces. The same number of each form C and A ∪ B. The weight is
unchanged when regular exchanges are made, and C is obtained from A ∪ B by
making regular exchanges.
    A solution C of the normal surface equations is fundamental if it cannot be
written as a sum of two other solutions, C 6= A + B.

Lemma 6 The set of fundamental solutions to the normal surface equations is
finite.

Proof: Real non-negative solution to the normal surface equations form a cone
               n
contained in R+  . We can intersect this cone with the convex simplex defined
by Σxi = 1, xi ≥ 0 and obtain a convex polyhedron with finitely many vertices
vj . The non-negative integer solutions are rational multiples of points in this

                                       10
polyhedron. Thus any solution of the normal surface equations can be expressed
as a rational linear combination of the vertex solutions vj . Consider now integral
multiples Vj = λj vj of the vj . The normal surfaces Vj also form a rational
basis for all normal surfaces, so any normal surface X can be expressed in the
form X = Σtj Vj with 0 ≤ tj . Now consider the set S of real solutions to the
normal surface equations which can be expressed in the form s = Σtj Vj with
0 ≤ tj ≤ 1, 1 ≤ j ≤ n. S is compact, and so contains a finite number of integral
points. If X is an integral solution of the normal surface equations not in S,
then some tk > 1 and we can write X as the sum of two other positive integral
solutions, X = Vk + (Σtj Vj − Vk ). Thus all fundamental solutions lie in S, and
there are only finitely many.
    Some subset of these fundamental solutions, those that also satisfy the
quadrilateral condition, correspond to embedded surfaces.
    The following result is due to Schubert [23].
Lemma 7 If C is a connected normal surface in an irreducible 3-manifold and
C is not fundamental then we can find connected normal surfaces A and B so
that C = A + B. If A and B are chosen to minimize the number of curves of
intersection in A ∩ B, then no curve in A ∩ B is separating in both A and B.
Proof: Suppose C = A1 + A2 . . . + Ak , where each Ai is an embedded normal
surface. If A2 intersects A1 , then we can perform regular exchanges successively
along each curve in their intersection. The number of surfaces adding to C
changes by at most one each time we perform a regular exchange. Continuing for
each surface Aj , we eventually arrive at a connected surface C, so at some point
we must get two connected surfaces whose sum is C. If these are not embedded,
we can perform regular exchanges along their curves of self-intersection, giving
a possibly larger collection of embedded surfaces. There are only finitely many
curves on which we can do a regular exchange so the process stops with two
embedded surfaces whose sum is C.
    Now pick A and B to minimize the number of curves of intersection in A ∩ B
among all pairs of connected embedded normal surfaces whose sum gives C.
Suppose a curve α in A ∩ B separates in both A and B. Then a regular ex-
change along α cannot result in a single connected surface. It must result in two
connected surfaces A′ and B ′ , possibly non-embedded. Regular exchanges on
all self-intersection curves of A′ and B ′ results in embedded surfaces A′′ and B ′′ ,
possibly not connected, whose sum is C. If A′ and B ′ are not connected, then
we can carry out a series of regular exchanges until we again arrive at exactly
two connected surfaces. Eventually we obtain C as a sum of two embedded
surfaces with fewer curves of intersection than A and B, a contradiction.
    A curve on the boundary torus of a knot complement is essential if it does
not bound a disk on the torus. The following lemma allows us to reduce the
search for an unknotting disk to the finite collection of fundamental surfaces.
Our proof is based on that of Jaco-Oertel[9].
Lemma 8 Suppose C is a normal disk in a knot complement, with minimal
weight among all normal disks with essential boundary. Then C is fundamental.

                                         11
Proof: If the lemma fails, then we can find two connected normal surfaces A
and B such that C = A + B. Pick A and B as in Lemma 7. Since χ(C) =
1 = χ(A) + χ(B), we have several possibilities. 1. A is a punctured torus and
B a 2-sphere. 2. A is a punctured Klein-bottle and B a 2-sphere. 3. A is a
disk and B a torus. 4. A is a disk and B an annulus. 5. A is a disk and B
a Mobius band. Possibilities involving embedded Klein bottles and projective
planes, though not more difficult, cannot occur in a knot complement.
    In each case we can obtain a contradiction. An argument used in [9] for
closed surfaces, extends to our setting. This extension is explicitly derived in
[11]. In each of the above cases, if C = A + B then we can find A′ and B ′ such
that C = A′ + B ′ where A′ is an essential disk and B ′ is a torus or an annulus.
The essential normal disk A′ has lower weight than C, a contradiction.
    Note: An alternate way to obtain a contradiction can be found by taking C
to be of minimal complexity, as measured in the sense of Jaco-Rubinstein [10].
In this setting the complexity measures the length of intersection of a normal
surface with the 2-skeleton of a triangulation.

Theorem 9 There is an algorithm to decide whether a knot is the unknot.

Proof: Triangulate the knot complement MK and construct the finitely many
fundamental solutions. Among them find the ones satisfying the quadrilateral
conditions. By calculating the Euler characteristics, check if any of these are
disks. If yes, test if the boundary of the disk is essential on ∂MK by checking
whether it disconnects ∂MK . If there is a disk with essential boundary on ∂MK
then K is the unknot. If there is no such disk it is not.
    We now show why the algorithm works. Suppose K is the unknot. Then it
bounds a disk. Lemma 2 implies that there is a normal disk D which bounds an
essential curve on ∂MK . Lemma 8 implies we can find such a disk among the
fundamental solutions. So the algorithm finds an unknotting disk if it exists.


6    Other algorithms to recognize the unknot.
One might hope that an approach involving a search for moves that simplify
a knot projection would give an algorithm to recognize the unknot. No ap-
proach using this idea has been found. The following projection of the unknot,
suggested by Cameron Gordon, shows that if one wants to use a sequence of
Reidemeister moves, it may be necessary to increase the number of crossings on
the way to the unknot. It is an interesting open problem to find a larger class
of allowable moves which would allow monotonic progress towards the unknot.
    Alternate algorithms to recognize the unknot could follow from a better
understanding of certain knot invariants. It is conjectured that the Jones poly-
nomial of a knot equals 1 if and only if the knot is the unknot. Since there is a
simple finite procedure for computing the Jones polynomial of a knot, a proof
of this conjecture would provide an algorithm to decide if a knot is the unknot.
    Kuperberg has pointed out that Thurston’s work on geometric structures
on 3-manifolds gives an alternate approach to constructing knot triviality al-

                                       12
Figure 7: The number of crossings in this projection of the unknot must be
increased before it can be decreased using Reidemeister moves.


gorithms, one of which we now describe. We will refer to it as an algebraic
algorithm.
    This algorithm considers PL knots, as before. We triangulate the 3-sphere
and consider a knot contained in the 1-skeleton. The algorithm tests whether
this knot is the unknot by running two processes in parallel.
    The first process checks if the knot is unknotted by looking for embedded
disks in the 2-skeleton. If it fails to find any, it takes a barycentric subdivision
and repeats. The process ends if it finds a disk, in which case the knot is
unknotted.
    The second process searches for a non-cyclic finite representation of the fun-
damental group of the knot, in the following way. It first computes the Wirtinger
presentation of the fundamental group of the knot complement. It then com-
putes all homomorphisms of the group to the groups S3 , S4 , S5 . . ., where Sn
is the group of permutations of n elements. All homomorphisms to Sn can be
constructed by mapping the Wirtinger presentation generators to the finitely
many possible sets of elements in Sn , and checking whether the relations of the
knot group are satisfied in Sn . The process stops if it finds a homomorphism
with non-cyclic image, in which case it concludes that the knot is non-trivial.

Theorem 10 The algebraic algorithm described above gives an algorithm to
decide whether a knot is the unknot.

Proof: If the knot is unknotted, the first process will end after a finite amount
of time.
    If the knot is not the unknot, then it is a consequence of the existence of
geometric structures on knot complements that the fundamental group of the
knot complement is a non-abelian residually finite group [7]. Residually finite
means that for any non-trivial element of the group, there is a homomorphism
to some finite group which takes that element to a non-trivial element of the
finite group. There is no loss of generality in considering as images only the
groups Sn , which contain all other finite groups as subgroups.
    A non-abelian residually finite group has a non-trivial commutator subgroup.
An element of this subgroup has non-trivial image in some Sn under some
homomorphism. If the image of all homomorphisms of the group were cyclic,
and therefore abelian, then this element would always map to the trivial element,

                                        13
contradicting residual finiteness. So for some element and some Sn the image
of the group is non-cyclic.
    The process is guaranteed to stop after a finite time in either case.


7    Classifying knots.
To classify all knots we need to be able to decide not just whether a knot is the
unknot, but whether two arbitrary knots K1 and K2 are the same. This was
carried out by Haken and Hemion using some additional arguments based on
normal surfaces [5]. We outline very briefly here an extension of the algebraic
algorithm described above that can also give such a classification. This emerges
from work of Thurston, and was also related to me by Kuperberg. We call it
the geometric algorithm to distinguish knots.
    Assume we are given two knots, K1 and K2 , each presented as an embedded
circle in the 1-skeleton of a triangulation of the 3-sphere. The idea is to set
two processes in motion, one of which will terminate if the knots are the same,
the other if they are different. Call the two triangulations T1 and T2 . The first
process checks if T1 is equal to T2 by an isomorphism carrying K1 to K2 . If not,
it performs a bistellar move on T1 and checks again. After trying all bistellar
moves on T1 , it performs all pairs of bistellar moves. Eventually it will get to
all sequences of k successive bistellar moves. If the two knots are the same, this
will terminate in finite time.
    The second process will terminate in finite time if the knots are distinct.
It has two stages, first constructing geometric structures on each knot comple-
ment, and then checking if they are distinct. It generates a series of subpro-
cesses, run in parallel, as it tries different triangulations. It searches for the
geometric structures on each knot complement, which must exist by Thurston’s
geometrization theorem. The geometric structure is constructed by triangulat-
ing the complement, with the tetrahedra allowed to be ideal, and constructing
geometric structures on each tetrahedron so that the angles at edges and ver-
tices match up. If no compatible collection of angles can be constructed, then
the process looks for tori and annuli in the 2-skeleton along which to cut up the
knot complement, and tries to geometrize each piece. If it fails, it subdivides
barycentrically and repeats. After a finite amount of time, geometric structures
on each knot complement will be found by this process. Moreover the meridian
of the knot and the gluing maps along splitting tori can be marked and remem-
bered. It remains to check if these structures determine distinct knots. This
can be done by putting an ǫ net on one 3-manifold, and trying to construct an
isometry of this net into the second knot complement, preserving markings. If
this is impossible, then the knots are distinct. If possible, then the process picks
ǫ smaller and tries again. If the knots are distinct, the process will fail to con-
struct an isometry eventually, and so will terminate in finite time, establishing
that the knots are different.




                                        14
8    Other recognition results.
In this section we briefly describe some other results on the problem of recog-
nizing knots and three dimensional manifolds.
    Schubert developed an alternate view of normal surfaces based on handle
theory. He gave an algorithm to decide if a link is split [23]. This approach is
also used in Jaco and Oertel [9], where an algorithm to decide if a 3-manifold
is Haken is developed. Haken and Hemion solved the recognition problem for
Haken manifolds [5]. Rubinstein extended the notion of normal surfaces to the
concept of almost normal surfaces. He used this to describe an algorithm which
decides whether a 3-manifold is homeomorphic to the 3-sphere [22]. Thompson
gave an elegant argument that this algorithm works by using the notion of thin
position [26]. Rubinstein also described algorithms to recognize Lens spaces
and other 3-manifolds of small genus. See also Stocking [25]. Rubinstein and
Rannard have recently announced an algorithm to recognize Seifert Fibered
manifolds. Sela gave an algorithm to decide whether two 3-manifolds with
Gromov hyperbolic fundamental group are homotopy equivalent [24]. Birman
and Hirsch [1] have recently announced a new algorithm, based on work of
Birman and Menasco, which detects whether a knot presented in braid form is
the trivial knot. Jaco and Tollefson describe algorithms to construct maximal
families of 2-spheres in a 3-manifold in [11]. They also develop the important
idea of a vertex surface, a type of fundamental normal surface introduced by
Jaco and Oertel in [9], which gives a more specialized representative for a class
of surfaces. In [4] a bound for the complexity of the unknotting algorithm is
given. It is also shown that this problem is in the class NP. Casson has recently
announced a computation of the compexity of th 3-sphere recognition algorithm,
which shows that it is also in the class NP.


References
    [1] J. Birman and M. Hirsch, Recognizing the Unknot, preprint.
    [2] W. Haken, Theorie der Normalflachen, Acta. Math. Vol. 105, 1961, 245-
        375. 1961, 245-375.
    [3] W. Haken, Connections between topological and group theoretical de-
        cision problems, Word Problems, W.W. Boone (Ed.) North Holland,
        Amsterdam 1973, 427-441.
    [4] J. Hass, J. Lagarias and N. Pippenger, The computational complexity
        of knot and link problems, preliminary report, Proc. 38th Annual Sym-
        posium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1997, 172-1181.
    [5] G. Hemion, The Classification of Knots and 3-dimensional Spaces, Ox-
        ford University Press, 1992.
    [6] J. Hempel, 3-manifolds, Annals of Math Studies 86, Princeton U. Press
        1976.

                                       15
 [7] J. Hempel, Residual finiteness for 3-manifolds, Combinatorial group the-
     ory and topology, Alta, Utah, 1984, Ann. of Math. Stud., 111, Princeton,
     379-396. Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1987.
 [8] J. Hopcroft and J. Ullman, Introduction to automata theory, languages
     and computation, Addison Wesley 1979.
 [9] Jaco, W. and Oertel, U., An Algorithm to Decide if a 3-Manifold is a
     Haken Manifold, Topology Vol. 23, No. 2, 1984, pp. 195-209.
[10] W. Jaco and J.H. Rubinstein, A piecewise linear theory of minimal sur-
     faces in 3-manifolds, J. Diff. Geom. Vol. 27, (1988), 493-524.
[11] W. Jaco and J.L. Tollefson, Algorithms for the complete decomposition
     of a closed 3-manifold, Illinois J. Math. 39 (1995), 358-406.
[12] K. Johannson, Classification problems in low-dimensional topology, Ge-
     ometric and algebraic topology, Banach Center Publ., 18, PWN, Warsaw
     (1986) 37-59.
[13] H. Kneser, Geschlossene Flachen in dreidimesionalen Mannifg-
     faltigkeiten, Jahresericht der Ent. Math. Verein 28 (1929) 248-260..
[14] S. V. Matveev, Algorithms for the recognition of the three-dimensional
     sphere (after A. Thompson). Mat. Sb. 186 (1995) 69-84.
[15] A.A. Markov, Insolubility of a problem of homeomorphy, Proc. Inter-
     national Congress of Mathematicians (1958) Cambridge Univ. Press,
     300-306.
[16] E.E. Moise, Affine Structures in 3-manifolds V, Annals of Math. 55
     (1952) 96-114.
[17] W. H. Meeks and S.T.Yau, Topology of three dimensional manifolds and
     the embedding theorems in minimal surface theory, Annals of Math. 112
     (1980) 441-484.
[18] W. Meeks, L. Simon and S.T. Yau, Embedded minimal surfaces, exotic
     spheres and manifolds of positive Ricci curvature, Annals of Math. 116
     (1982) 621-659.
[19] C.D. Papakyriakopoulous, On Dehn’s lemma and the asphericity of
     knots, Annals of Math. 66 (1957), 1-26.
[20] J. J. Rotman, The Theory of Groups, Second Ed., Allyn and Bacon
     (1973).
[21] J.H. Rubinstein, Polyhedral minimal surfaces, Heegaard splittings and
     decision problems for 3-dimensional manifolds, Proceedings of the Geor-
     gia Topology Conference, (1993) AMS/Intl. Press, 1-20.


                                   16
  [22] J.H. Rubinstein, An algorithm to recognize the 3-sphere, to appear in
       Proceedings of the ICM, Zurich 1994. 3.
  [23] H. Schubert, Bestimmung der Primfaktorzerlegung von Verkettungen,
       Math. Z. 76 (1961) 116-148.
  [24] Z. Sela, The isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups I. Annals of
       Math. 141 (1995) 217-283.
  [25] M. Stocking, Almost normal surfaces in 3-manifolds. Ph.D. Thesis, UC
       Davis (1996).
  [26] A. Thompson, Thin Position and the Recognition Problem for S 3 , Math.
       Research Letters 1, (1994) 613-630.
  [27] W. Thurston, The geometry and topology of 3-dimensional manifolds,
       Princeton University Lecture Notes (1978).
  [28] F. Waldhausen, Recent results on sufficiently large 3-manifolds, Proc.
       Sympos. in Pure Math. 32, Amer. Math. Soc. (1978) 21 - 38.
  [29] F. Waldhausen, Some problems on 3-manifolds, Proc. Sympos. in Pure
       Math. 32, Amer. Math. Soc. (1978) 313-322.

Joel Hass
Department of Mathematics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
e-mail: hass@@math.ucdavis.edu




                                    17
