arXiv:1105.0129v2 [math.CO] 17 Jun 2011




                                          Sheaves on Graphs, Their Homological Invariants,
                                           and a Proof of the Hanna Neumann Conjecture


                                                                  Joel Friedman




                                             Author address:

                                             Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia,
                                          Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, CANADA, and Department of Mathematics,
                                          University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2, CANADA.
                                             E-mail address: jf@cs.ubc.ca or jf@math.ubc.ca
                              Contents

Introduction                                                        vii
Chapter 1. Foundations of Sheaves on Graphs and Their Homological
              Invariants                                             1
  1.1. Introduction                                                  1
  1.2. Basic Definitions and Main Results                            5
  1.3. Galois and Covering Theory                                   14
  1.4. Sheaf Theory and Homology                                    18
  1.5. Twisted Cohomology                                           26
  1.6. Maximum Excess and Supermodularity                           32
  1.7. htwist
         1    and the Universal Abelian Covering                    36
  1.8. Proof of Theorem 1.10                                        40
  1.9. Concluding Remarks                                           55
Chapter 2. The Hanna Neumann Conjecture                             57
  2.1. Introduction                                                 57
  2.2. The Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture                    59
  2.3. Graph Theoretic Formulation of the SHNC                      61
  2.4. Galois and Covering Theory in the SHNC                       62
  2.5. ρ-kernels                                                    65
  2.6. Symmetry and Algebra of the Excess                           70
  2.7. Variability of k-th Power Kernels                            76
  2.8. Proof of the SHNC                                            81
  2.9. Concluding Remarks                                           82
Appendix A. A Direct View of ρ-Kernels                              85
Bibliography                                                        91




                                    v
                                     Abstract

     In this paper we establish some foundations regarding sheaves of vector spaces
on graphs and their invariants, such as homology groups and their limits. We then
use these ideas to prove the Hanna Neumann Conjecture of the 1950’s; in fact, we
prove a strengthened form of the conjecture.
    We introduce a notion of a sheaf of vector spaces on a graph, and develop the
foundations of homology theories for such sheaves. One sheaf invariant, its “max-
imum excess,” has a number of remarkable properties. It has a simple definition,
with no reference to homology theory, that resembles graph expansion. Yet it is a
“limit” of Betti numbers, and hence has a short/long exact sequence theory and re-
sembles the L2 Betti numbers of Atiyah. Also, the maximum excess is defined via a
supermodular function, which gives the maximum excess much stronger properties
than one has of a typical Betti number.
    Our sheaf theory can be viewed as a vast generalization of algebraic graph
theory: each sheaf has invariants associated to it—such as Betti numbers and
Laplacian matrices—that generalize those in classical graph theory.
    We shall use “Galois graph theory” to reduce the Strengthened Hanna Neu-
mann Conjecture to showing that certain sheaves, that we call ρ-kernels, have zero
maximum excess. We use the symmetry in Galois theory to argue that if the
Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture is false, then the maximum excess of
“most of” these ρ-kernels must be large. We then give an inductive argument to
show that this is impossible.




     Received by the editor May 30, 2011.
     2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 05C10, 55N30, 18F20; Secondary 05C50,
18F10, 14F20.
     Key words and phrases. Graphs, sheaves, Hanna Neumann Conjecture, homology, Galois
theory.
     Research supported in part by an NSERC grant. Research done in part at the Centre
Bernoulli, funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation.

                                            vi
                               Introduction

     This memoir has two main goals. First, we develop some foundations on what
we call “sheaves on graphs” and their invariants. Second, using these foundations,
we resolve the Hanna Neumann Conjecture of the 1950’s.
     Although our foundations of sheaves on graphs seem likely to impact a number
of areas of graph theory, the theme that is common to most of this memoir is the
Hanna Neumann Conjecture (or HNC). Both this conjecture and a strengthening
of it, known as the Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture (or SHNC) have
been extensively studied (see [Bur71, Imr77b, Imr77a, Ser83, Ger83, Sta83,
Neu90, Tar92, Dic94, Tar96, Iva99, Arz00, DF01, Iva01, Kha02, MW02,
JKM03, Neu07, Eve08, Min10]). These conjectures are usually stated as an
inequality involving free groups, although both conjectures have well-known refor-
mulations in term of finite graphs. In this memoir we prove both conjectures, using
the finite graph reformulations, reducing both to the vanishing of a homology group
of certain sheaves on graphs.
     This work was originally written and posted to arxiv.com as two separate
articles. The first aritcle, [Fri11b], contains the foundational material on sheaves
of graphs, and comprises Chapter 1 of this manuscript. The second article, [Fri11a],
resolves the SHNC (and HNC), and Chapter 2 of this manuscript consists of this
material. This manuscript is easier to read than both articles separately, in that
redundant definitions have been discarded, and references in Chapter 2 to material
in Chapter 1 are now more specific. Yet, as we now explain, Chapters 1 and 2 are
largely independently of one another, and Chapter 1, the foundations of sheaves on
graphs, is of interest beyond the HNC and SHNC. To explain this interest, let us
recall a bit about sheaf theory and its connection to discrete mathematics.
     Among many (co)homology theories of topological spaces, the sheaf approach
has many advantages. For one, it works with non-Hausdorff spaces, as done first by
Serre in algebraic geometry with the Zariski topology (see [Har77]). Grothendieck’s
sheaf theory of [sga72a, sga72b, sga73, sga77] defined a notion of a sheaf on
very general spaces now called “Grothendieck topologies.” While Grothendieck’s
work has had remarkable success to cohomology theories in algebraic geometry,
we believe that graph theory and combinatorics may greatly benefit by studying
very special Grothendieck topologies formulated from finite, discrete structures. In
particular, we will resolve the SHNC using a simple, finite Grothendieck topology
associated to any finite graph.
     Another aspect of sheaf cohomology is that it vastly generalizes the cohomology
of a space. Each sheaf has injective resolutions that give cohomology groups. When
the sheaf is take to be the “structure sheaf” of the space, we recover the cohomology
groups of the space. However, there are many sheaves apart from the structure
sheaf, and the resulting cohomology groups can represent a variety of aspects of

                                         vii
viii                               INTRODUCTION


the space. In particular, each open subset of a space, X, has an associated sheaf
on X that reflects many properties of X; we will use such sheaves in our proof of
the SHNC.
     One fundamental aspect of any (co)homology theory is that it expresses re-
lations between related (co)homology groups in terms of exact sequences. Fur-
thermore, any exact sequence yields a triangle inequality between the dimensions
or ranks of any three consecutive elements. In [Fri05, Fri06, Fri07] we began
an investigation into applying such inequalities to complexity theory, in particular
to construct formal complexity measures to obtain lower bounds for formula size.
Similarly, in this manuscript, we prove the SHNC from such an inequality.
     In Chapter 1 we define a sheaf on a graph with no reference to sheaf theory,
rather as a collection of vector spaces indexed on the vertices and edges of the graphs
along with certain “restriction” maps. We add that one can view such a sheaf as
a simple genelization of an incidence matrix of a graph; it follows that sheaves on
graphs can be viewed as a vast generalization of classical algebraic graph theory (of
adjacency matrices, Laplacians, etc.). However, our sheaves on graphs can also be
viewed as the very special case of sheaves of finite dimensional vector spaces on a
simple Grothendieck topology that we associate to a finite graph. In the case where
the graph has no self loops, the Grothendieck topology is equivalent to a simple
topological space.
     Chapter 1 begins with a simple definition of sheaves on graphs and some exam-
ples. However, quickly we begin to study “limits” of Betti numbers of these sheaves.
The most remarkable invariant that we study in Chapter 1 is the maximum excess
of a sheaf. We give a number of strong results regarding the maximum excess, and
the related “twisted” homology. These are related to the L2 Betti numbers first
studied by Atiyah (see [Ati76, Lüc02]); however, the results we obtain in the case
of finite graphs, especially regarding the maximum excess, seem especially strong.
     To summarize the above few paragraphs, here are some reasons that Chapter 1
is of interest independent of the HNC:
       (1) sheaf theory on graphs generalizes algebraic graph theory and, therefore,
           may strengthen its applications;
       (2) our results on maximum excess give tools to study certain graph invariants
           such as the “reduced cyclicity” and number of “acyclic components;”
       (3) our results on the maximum excess of sheaves may indicate what one can
           expect of limits of Betti numbers on more general structures;
       (4) any results on sheaves on graphs may give new results and examples of
           what to expect on more general finite Grothendieck topologies, such as
           those of possible interest to complexity theory;
       (5) any results on Betti numbers of sheaves may yield new inequalities on
           other integers that can be viewed as akin to Betti numbers on some dis-
           crete Grothendieck topology.
Of course, despite the above reasons for interest in sheaves on graphs, the reader
will see that Chapter 1 is largely developed with an eye toward the reduced cyclicity
and the HNC.
     Let us summarize aspects of Chapter 2, our proof of the SHNC, in general terms.
This will serve to highlight our approach to this problem via sheaves on graph, which
is very different than previous approaches. We use a graph theoretic formulation of
the SHNC that involves the reduced cyclicity of three graphs. However, using what
                                   INTRODUCTION                                      ix


we call “Galois graph theory” (of [Fri93, ST96], but also [Gro77]), the SHNC
amounts to showing that the reduced cyclicity of one graph is less than that of
another graph, and both of these graphs admit a natural map to the same Cayley
graph.
     We wish to emphasize that, to the best of our knowledge, our manuscript
represents the first application of Galois graph theory to other parts of graph theory.
That is, Galois graph theory occurs for its own interest (in [Fri93]) and for its
connection to number theory (in [ST96]). However, in this manuscript we make
essential use of Galois graph theory to two independent questions not obviously
related to Galois graph theory. First, in Chapter 1 we use Galois graph theory to
show that maximum excess scales under pulling back by a covering map; first we
prove this for Galois morphisms, making essential use of the symmetry in Galois
theory, and then we deduce the general case by the Normal Extension Theorem of
Galois graph theory. Second, Galois graph theory is the basis of our construction
of ρ-kernels, upon which our approach to the HNC and SHNC is based, and the
symmetry of these ρ-kernels is used constantly in Chapter 2.
     Let us return to the SHNC, and recall that exact sequences give triangle in-
equalities on the dimensions of consecutive terms. The reduced cyclicity is a type of
limiting first Betti number. Hence, one graph has smaller reduced cyclicity than a
second graph provided that there is a surjection from the first graph to the second,
such that the kernel of this surjection has vanishing limiting first Betti number.
Unfortunately there is no such graph surjection in the graphs that arise from the
SHNC. However, both graphs admit a natural map to the same Cayley graph, and
hence can be viewed as sheaves on this Cayley graph (much as open subsets of a
topological space have associated sheaves). Remarkably, there is a surjection from
the first graph to the second when viewed as sheaves. The kernel of such a sujection
(generally a sheaf) will be called a ρ-kernel, and the SHNC turns out to be implied
by the vanishing limiting first Betti number, or maximum excess, of an appropriate
collection of ρ-kernels.
     We emphasize that the ρ-kernels that we build seem almost forced upon us,
once we look for the surjections described above. However, it does not seem to be
an easy question, essentially of linear algebra, to determine whether or not these
ρ-kernels have vanishing maximum excess. In fact, if we define a ρ-kernel as the
kernel of any surjection of the two graphs of interest, then there are ρ-kernels whose
maximum excess does not vanish.
     To complete the proof of the SHNC, we shall show that the maximum excess of
a “generic” ρ-kernel vanishes. This main idea is that there is a symmetry property
of the “excess maximizer,” which implies that maximum excess of a generic ρ-kernel
must be a multiple of the order of an associated Galois group (the group associated
to the Cayley graph mentioned above). From this point one knows that if the
generic maximum excess doesn’t vanish, it would be large; one can then use two
different inductive arguments to show that this is impossible.
     For the reader interested only in a proof of the HNC, we mention that can
read its proof in Chapter 2 while skipping most of the material in Chapter 1.
Indeed, Chapter 2 is based on the “stand alone” paper, [Fri11a], written without
explicit reference to homology theory, using only sheaves and maximum excess. So
to read Chapter 2, one needs the definitions of sheaves and maximum excess, of
Section 1.2, the Galois graph theory of Section 1.3, and the submodularity of the
x                                  INTRODUCTION


excess in Section 1.6. Aside from these results, the proof in [Fri11a] needed the
fact that the maximum excess is a “first quasi-Betti number,” which relies on the
main (and most difficult) theorem of Chapter 1. However, we have recently found
a variant of the proof in [Fri11a] which does not require this fact. Hence one can
read a complete proof of the HNC and SNHC in this manuscript, without most
of Chapter 1 and any reference to homology. However, as explained in Chapter 2,
homology still gives valuable insight into the proof.
     We mention that as of writing [Fri11b, Fri11a], Mineyev has informed us of his
independent proof of the HNC and SHNC, first using Hilbert modules ([Min11b],
based on [Min10]), and then using only combinatorial group theory ([Min11a]).
His approaches seem very different from ours.
     We wish to thank Laurant Bartholdi, for conversations and introducing us to
the SHNC, and Avner Friedman, for comments on a draft of this manuscript. We
thank Luc Illusie, for an inspiring discussion regarding our ideas involving sheaf the-
ory, homology, and the SHNC; this discussion was a turning point in our research.
We wish to thank for following people for conversations: Goulnara Arjantseva,
Warren Dicks, Bernt Everitt, Sadok Kallel, Richard Kent, Igor Mineyev, Pierre
Pansu, and Daniel Wise. Finally, we thank Alain Valette and the Centre Bernoulli
at the EPFL for hosting us during a programme on limits of graphs, where we met
Bartholdi and Pansu and began this work.
                                   CHAPTER 1


    Foundations of Sheaves on Graphs and Their
              Homological Invariants

                                1.1. Introduction
     The main goal of this chapter is to introduce a notion of a sheaf on a graph
and to establish some foundational results regarding the homology groups of such
sheaves and related invariants. After developing some general points we shall focus
on a remarkable invariant of a sheaf that we call the maximum excess.
     The maximum excess of a sheaf arises naturally as a “limit” of Betti numbers,
akin to L2 Betti number defined by Atiyah. Although such limits have been studied
in many contexts, we are able to show some compellingly strong results about these
limits in the case of sheaves on graphs. First, the maximum excess can be defined,
with no reference to homology theory, in a manner that makes it resemble quantities
seen in matching theory or expander graphs. Second, this definition amounts to
the maximum of an “excess” function that is supermodular; this gives additional
structure to the maximum excess that is not apparent from homology theory. Third,
for any given sheaf, the limit is attained from “twisted Betti numbers” by passing
to a finite cover (as opposed to an infinite limit of covers).
     Our motivation for studying the maximum excess and certain Betti numbers
arose from studying an important graph invariant that we call the reduced cyclicity
of a graph. This invariant arises in one formulation of the much studied Hanna
Neumann Conjecture of the 1950’s (see [Bur71, Imr77b, Imr77a, Ser83, Ger83,
Sta83, Neu90, Tar92, Dic94, Tar96, Iva99, Arz00, DF01, Iva01, Kha02,
MW02, JKM03, Neu07, Eve08, Min10]); in Chapter 2 we shall use the results
of this chapter to prove this conjecture. Moreover, our methods will prove what is
known as the Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture (or SHNC) of [Neu90].
     Our sheaf theory on graphs is based on the sheaf theory of Grothendieck (see
[sga72a, sga72b, sga73, sga77]), built upon what are now known as Grothendieck
topologies. In the special case when the graph has no self-loops, the sheaf theory
we describe is equivalent to the sheaf theory on certain topological spaces (see
[Har77]). The basic definition of sheaves on graphs and their homology groups
are special cases of theory developed in [Fri05, Fri06, Fri07] and are probably
special cases of situations arising in the fields of toric varieties and quivers. How-
ever, in this chapter we study a special case of this general notion of sheaf theory,
proving especially strong theorems particular to sheaves on graphs and obtaining
new theorems in graph theory. In this process we also introduce new invariants in
sheaf theory—such as “maximum excess” and “twisted homology”—and establish
theorems about these invariants that may become useful to sheaf theories in other
settings.


                                          1
2                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


     In this chapter we explore primarily those aspects of sheaf theory directly re-
lated to our future study of the SHNC, namely general properties of the maximum
excess. However, we believe sheaf theory is a concept fundamental to graph theory,
and that there will probably emerge other applications of these ideas. One reason
for this belief is that many areas in graph theory, such as expanding graphs, work
with the adjacency matrix of a graph. Any sheaf on a graph, G, has an adjacency
matrix (and incidence matrix, Laplacian, etc.) with many of the properties that
graph adjacency matrices have. A graph has a particularly simple sheaf that we
call its “structure sheaf.” The adjacency matrix of the structure sheaf turns out to
be the adjacency matrix of G. In this way the adjacency matrix of a graph, and all
of traditional algebraic graph theory, can be generalized to sheaf theory; the sheaf
theory, given its more general nature and expressiveness, may shed new light on
traditional algebraic graph theory and its applications.
     New graph theoretic inequalities arise in our sheaf theory out of “long exact se-
quences,” analogous to long exact sequences that appear in virtually any homology
theory. Indeed, relations between different homology groups are often expressed
in exact sequences, and in any exact sequence of vector spaces, the dimensions of
three consecutive elements satisfy a triangle inequality. It is such triangle inequal-
ities that inspire and form the basis of our approach to the SHNC.
     One remarkable aspect of our sheaf theory is that it adds “new morphisms”
between graphs. In other words, consider two graphs, G1 and G2 that each admit
a morphism to another graph, G. It is possible to associate with each Gi a sheaf,
S(Gi ), over G, that contains all the information present in Gi . Any G-morphism
from G1 to G2 gives rise to a morphism of sheaves, from S(G1 ) to S(G2 ); however,
there are sheaf morphisms from S(G1 ) to S(G2 ) that do not arise from any graph
morphism. For example, there may be a surjection from S(G1 ) to S(G2 ) when
there is no graph theoretic surjection G1 → G2 . Some such “new surjections” are
crucial to our proof of the SHNC; the kernel of such “new surjections” give a type
of sheaf that we call a ρ-kernel, which is the basis of our approach to the SHNC.
Said otherwise, for any graph, G, there is a faithful functor from the category of
“graphs over G” to the category of “sheaves over G;” however this functor is not
full, and some of the “new morphisms” between graphs over G, viewed as sheaves
over G, ultimately yield new concepts in graph theory needed in our proof of the
SHNC.
     This chapter will focus on four types of invariants of sheaves: (1) homology
groups and resulting Betti numbers, (2) twisted homology groups and resulting
twisted Betti numbers, (3) the maximum excess, and (4) limiting twisted Betti
numbers. Let us briefly motivate our interest in these invariants and describe the
main theorems in this chapter. This discussion will be made more precise, with
more background, in Section 1.2.
     Our first type of invariant, homology groups of sheaves and resulting Betti
numbers, will not involve any difficult theorems. The main novelty of this type
of invariant is in its definition; it is chosen in a way that it has appropriate prop-
erties for our needs and can express some traditional invariants of a graph; these
invariants include its Euler characteristic and the traditional zeroth and first Betti
numbers. In sheaf theory, usually sheaf cohomology based on the global section
functor is a central object of study; however, these cohomology groups do not yield
the invariants of interest to us in this chapter. Instead, our homology groups are
                                  1.1. INTRODUCTION                                    3


based on global cosections; i.e., our homology groups are essentially Ext groups in
the first variable, where the second variable is fixed to be the structure sheaf.
      The SHNC conjecture can be reformulated in graph theoretic terms, involving
a more troubling graph invariant, ρ(G), of a graph, G, which we call the reduced
cyclicity of G. The reason this graph invariant is troubling is that its usual definition
seems to require that we know how many connected components of G are acyclic,
i.e., are isolated vertices or trees. Prior to this paper, all non-trivial techniques
we know to bound ρ(G) either presuppose something about the number of acyclic
components of G, or else they overlook such components; as such, previous results
on the reduced cyclicity usually either require special assumptions or give results
that are not sharp. Our second set of invariants, the twisted homology groups and
their dimensions, i.e., the twisted Betti numbers, give ρ(G1 ) as the first twisted
Betti number of a certain sheaf on G, for any graph, G1 , with a graph morphism
to G. As such, the long exact sequences arising in twisted homology give the first
sharp relations between values of ρ; however, these relations usually involve sheaves
and not just graphs alone.
      Let us sketch the idea of why reduced cyclicity is a special case of a twisted
Betti number. In this chapter we observe that ρ(G) is the limit of h1 (K)/[K : G]
over “generic Abelian coverings maps,” K → G, where the degree, [K : G], of
the covering map tends to infinity. It is well known that for Abelian covering maps
K → G, we can recover spectral properties of the adjacency matrix of K by working
with that of G and “twisting its entries,” i.e., multiplying certain entries by roots
of unity that appear in the characters of the underlying Abelian group. So we form
“twisted” homology groups by “generically twisting” a sheaf, with twists that are
parameters or indeterminates, and compute that the reduced connectivity, ρ(G),
equals the first “twisted” Betti number of the structure sheaf of G. This gives a
generalization of the definition of ρ from graphs to sheaves, and the resulting twisted
Betti numbers satisfy triangle inequalities coming from the long exact sequences in
twisted homology.
      Another promising fact about twisted Betti numbers is that, via the theory of
long exact sequences, one can reduce the SHNC to the vanishing of the first twisted
Betti number of a collection of sheaves that we call ρ-kernels.
      The problem is that the twisted homology approach often seems to be the
“wrong” way to view the reduced cyclicity, mainly for the following reason. The
Euler characteristic and reduced cyclicity have a remarkable scaling property under
covering maps, φ : K → G, i.e.,
                    χ(K) = χ(G) deg(φ),       ρ(K) = ρ(G) deg(φ).
Twisted Betti numbers do not always scale in this way; this makes us suspect
that the twisted Betti number is not always a good generalization of the reduced
cyclicity.
    The remedy comes in our third type of invariant, a single invariant of a sheaf
that we shall define and call its maximum excess. This is an integer that one can
define simply and with no reference to homology theory. Its definition resembles
combinatorial invariants arising in matching theory or expander graphs. The max-
imum excess of any sheaf is at most the first twisted Betti number, and the two
are equal on many types of sheaves, including all constant sheaves. Hence the two
concepts are related but not identical. Furthermore, the SHNC is implied by the
(a priori weaker) vanishing maximum excess of ρ-kernels, and the maximum excess
4                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


satisfies stronger properties that yield better bounds than what one would get for
the first twisted Betti number. So for the SHNC, we largely abandon the idea of
using twisted Betti numbers to generalize ρ from graphs to sheaves, and instead
use the maximum excess. The problem is that to proof the SHNC we require in-
equalities involving the maximum excess akin to those holding of Betti numbers of
homology theories via long exact sequences; there is no a priori reason that such
inequalities should hold.
     The main theorem of this chapter, Theorem 1.10, says that for any fixed sheaf
on a graph, G, there is an integer, q, with the following property: the maximum
excess and first twisted Betti number agree when the sheaf is “pulled back” along
a covering map G′ → G, provided that the girth of G′ is at least q.
     The main theorem implies that the maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti num-
ber, meaning that the maximum excess satisfies certain triangular inequalities that
we use to prove the SHNC. However, in Chapter 2 we see that a variation of our
proof avoids these triangular inequalities.
     Another view of our main theorem is that there exists a “limit” to the ratio of
a twisted Betti number of a pullback of a fixed sheaf along a graph covering to the
degree of the covering. We shall call this limiting ratio a “limiting twisted Betti
number,” which is our fourth type of invariant. Our main theorem can be rephrased
as saying that the first limiting twisted Betti number is just the maximum excess. It
is easy to see that limiting twisted Betti numbers satisfy the triangular inequalities
we desire for the maximum excess; hence proving the main theorem proves the
desired inequalities for the maximum excess. However, as a limiting Betti number,
the maximum excess actually has associated homology groups whose dimensions
divided by the covering degree approximate the maximum excess. And it may turn
out that the homology groups themselves may contain useful information beyond
knowing merely their dimension; however, for our proof of the SHNC, all that we
need is the dimensions of these homology groups, i.e., their Betti numbers.
     Lior Silbermann has pointed out to us that our notion of limiting twisting Betti
numbers is a discrete analogue of “L2 Betti numbers” introduced by Atiyah on man-
ifolds ([Ati76]); the theory involved in the study of L2 Betti numbers (see[Lüc02]),
especially the von Neumann dimension of certain “matrices” of this theory, may
already imply that our limiting twisting Betti numbers do have a limit and that
it is an integer (because the fundamental group of a graph is a free group). So
part of our results can be viewed as a very explicit type of L2 or limiting Betti
number calculation (for the very special case sheaves on graphs), that includes
stronger information; indeed, we give a simple interpretation of this number (the
maximum excess) and a finite procedure for computing it (pulling back to a graph
of sufficiently large girth and computing a twisted Betti number).
     We note that for the purpose of proving the SHNC, the main results needed
from this chapter are the definitions of a sheaf and its maximum excess, and a few
properties we prove regarding the maximum excess. If we could prove such proper-
ties without using homology theory, we could study the SHNC without homology
theory. Nonetheless, we find that twisted homology gives important intuition for
the maximum excess; for example, we first proved the SHNC using twisted ho-
mology, and only discovered during the writing of [Fri11a] that the proof could
be written entirely in terms of the maximum excess. As we remark at the end of
                    1.2. BASIC DEFINITIONS AND MAIN RESULTS                         5


Chapter 2, there is a way to prove the SHNC with no reference to homology theory,
but this requires some extra combinatorial analysis (namely Appendix A).
     The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In Section 1.2 we give precise
definitions and statements of the theorems in this chapter. In Section 1.3 we re-
view part of what might be called “Galois theory of graphs” that we will use in
this chapter. In Section 1.4 we give the basic properties of sheaves and homology,
pullbacks and their adjoints; then we explain everything in terms of cohomology of
Grothendieck topologies (this explanation will help the reader to understand the
context of our definitions, but this explanation is not necessary to read the rest of
this paper). In Section 1.5 we define the twisted homology and compute the twisted
homology of the constant sheaf of a graph; we also interpret twisted homology in
terms of Abelian covers. In Section 1.6 we establish the basic properties of the max-
imum excess, including its bound on the twisted homology. The next two sections
establish our main theorem. In Section 1.7 we show how to interpret elements of
the first twisted homology group of a graph in terms of the first homology group of
the maximum Abelian covering of the graph. In Section 1.8 we prove Theorem 1.10,
that says that the first twisted Betti number and the maximum excess agree after
an appropriate pullback. In Section 1.9 we make some concluding remarks.

                  1.2. Basic Definitions and Main Results
    In this section we will define sheaves and all the main invariants of sheaves
that we use in this paper. We will state the main theorem in this chapter, and
state or describe other results in this chapter. In most of this paper we work with
directed graphs (digraphs), which makes things notationally simpler; as we remark
in Section 1.9, all this sheaf and homology theory works just as well with undirected
graphs, although it is slightly more cumbersome if one wants to avoid orienting the
edges.

     1.2.1. Definition of Sheaves and Homology. We will allow directed graphs
to have multiple edges and self-loops; so in this paper a directed graph (or digraph)
consists of tuple G = (VG , EG , tG , hG ) where VG and EG are sets—the vertex and
edge sets—and tG : EG → VG is the “tail” map and hG : EG → VG the “head”
map. Throughout this paper, unless otherwise indicated, a digraph is assumed to
be finite, i.e., the vertex and edge sets are finite.
     Recall that a morphism of digraphs, µ : K → G, is a pair µ = (µV , µE ) of maps
µV : VK → VG and µE : EK → EG such that tG µE = µV tK and hG µE = µV hK .
We can usually drop the subscripts from µV and µE , although for clarity we shall
sometimes include them.
     Recall that fibre products exist for directed graphs (see, for example, [Fri93],
or [Sta83], where fibre products are called “pullbacks”) and the fibre product,
K = G1 ×G G2 , of morphisms µ1 : G1 → G and µ2 : G2 → G has
                     VK = {(v1 , v2 ) | vi ∈ VGi , µ1 v1 = µ2 v2 },
                     EK = {(e1 , e2 ) | ei ∈ EGi , µ1 e1 = µ2 e2 },
                     tK = (tG1 , tG2 ),   and hK = (hG1 , hG2 ).
For i = 1, 2, respectively, there are natural digraph morphisms, πi : G1 ×G G2 → Gi
called projection onto the first and second component, respectively, given by the
respective set theoretic projections on VK and EK .
6                      1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


     We say that ν : K → G is a covering map (respectively, étale1) if for each
v ∈ VK , ν gives a bijection (respectively, injection) of incoming edges of v (i.e.,
those edges whose head is v) with those of ν(v), and a bijection (respectively,
injection) of outgoing edges of v and ν(v). If ν : K → G is a covering map and G
is connected, then the degree of ν, denoted [K : G], is the number of preimages of
a vertex or edge in G under ν (which does not depend on the vertex or edge); if
G is not connected, one can still write [K : G] when the number of preimages of a
vertex or edge in G is the same for all vertices and edges.
     Given a digraph, G, we view G as an undirected graph (by forgetting the
directions along the edges), and let hi (G) denote the i-th Betti number of G, and
χ(G) its Euler characteristic; hence h0 (G) is the number of connected components
of G, h1 (G) is the minimum number of edges needed to be removed from G to leave
it free of cycles, and
                         h0 (G) − h1 (G) = χ(G) = |VG | − |EG |.
Let conn(G) denote the connected components of G, and let
                                X
(1.1)                ρ(G) =          max(0, h1 (X) − 1),
                                   X∈conn(G)

which we call the reduced cyclicity of G.
     For each digraph, G, and field, F, our sheaf theory is the theory of sheaves
of finite dimensional F-vector spaces on a certain finite Grothendieck topology (see
[sga72a, sga72b, sga73, sga77], where a Grothendieck topology is called a “site”)
that we associate to G; this Grothendieck topology has many properties in common
with topological spaces; in [Fri05] we have called these spaces semitoplogical, and
have worked out the structure of their injective and projective modules, which allows
us to compute derived functors (e.g., cohomology, Ext groups), used in [Fri05,
Fri06, Fri07]. Here we define sheaves and describe a homology theory “from
scratch,” without appealing to projective or injective modules; later we explain
how our homology theory fits into standard sheaf theory as the derived functors of
global cosections.
Definition 1.1. Let G = (V, E, t, h) = (VG , EG , tG , hG ) be a directed graph, and F
a field. By a sheaf of finite dimensional F-vector spaces on G, or simply a sheaf on
G, we mean the data, F , consisting of
     (1) a finite dimensional F-vector space, F (v), for each v ∈ V ,
     (2) a finite dimensional F-vector space, F (e), for each e ∈ E,
     (3) a linear map, F (t, e) : F (e) → F (te) for each e ∈ E,
     (4) a linear map, F (h, e) : F (e) → F (he) for each e ∈ E,
The vector spaces F (P ), ranging over all P ∈ VG ∐ EG (∐ denoting the disjoint
union), are called the values of F . The morphisms F (t, e) and F (h, e) are called
the restriction maps. If U is a finite dimensional vector space over F, the constant
sheaf associated to U , denoted U , is the sheaf comprised of the value U at each
vertex and edge, with all restriction maps being the identity map. The constant
sheaf F will be called the structure sheaf of G (with respect to the field, F), for
reasons to be explained later.

    1Stallings, in [Sta83], uses the term “immersion.”
                     1.2. BASIC DEFINITIONS AND MAIN RESULTS                          7


     The field, F, is arbitrary, although at times we insist that it not be finite, and
at times that it have characteristic zero.
     Now we define homology groups. To a sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, we set
                                  M                   M
                        F (E) =       F (e), F (V ) =     F (v).
                                e∈E                   v∈V

We associate a transformation
                             dh = dh,F : F (E) → F (V )
defined by taking F (e) (viewed as a component of F (E)) to F (he) (a component
of F (V )) via the map F (h, e). Similarly we define dt . We define the differential of
F to be
                                  d = dF = dh − dt .
Definition 1.2. We define the zeroth and first homology groups of F to be, re-
spectively,
                 H0 (G, F ) = cokernel(d), H1 (G, F ) = kernel(d).
We denote by hi (G, F ) the dimension of Hi (G, F ) as an F-vector space, and call it
the i-th Betti number of F . We often just write hi (F ) and Hi (F ) if G is clear from
the context (when no confusion will arise between hi (F ), the dimension, and h the
head map of a graph). We call Hi (F) the i-th homology group of G with coefficients
in F, denoted Hi (G) or, for clarity, Hi (G, F).
    For F = F, d is just the usual incidence matrix; thus, if F is of characteristic
zero, then the hi (G), i.e., the dimension of the Hi (G), are the usual Betti numbers
of G.
    Define the Euler characteristic of F to be
                                                           
                          χ(F ) = dim F (V ) − dim F (E) .
Since dF has domain F (E) and codomain F (V ), we have
                               h0 (F ) − h1 (F ) = χ(F ).
     If j : G′ → G is a digraph morphism, there is a naturally defined sheaf j! F
on G such that Hi (j! F) is naturally isomorphic to Hi (G′ ) (j! will be defined as
a functor from sheaves on G′ to sheaves on G in Subsection 1.4.1); when j is an
inclusion, then j! F is just the sheaf whose values are F on G′ and 0 outside of G′
(i.e., on vertices and edges not in G′ ); we will usually use FG′ to denote j! F (which
is somewhat abusive unless j is understood). If φ : G′ → G′′ is a morphism of
digraphs over G, then φ gives rise to a natural morphism of sheaves FG′ → FG′′ .
In this way the functor G′ 7→ FG′ includes the category of digraphs over G as
a subcategory of sheaves over G. As mentioned before, one key aspect of sheaf
theory is that the functor is not full, i.e., there exist (very important) morphisms of
sheaves FG′ → FG′′ that do not arise from a morphism of digraphs G′ → G′′ ; such
morphisms will be needed to define sheaves (their kernels) that we call ρ-kernels,
which will be crucial to our approach to the SHNC.
     Next we give the long exact sequence in homology associated to a short exact
sequence of sheaves.
Definition 1.3. A morphism of sheaves α : F → G on G is a collection of linear
maps αv : F (v) → G(v) for each v ∈ V and αe : F (e) → G(e) for each e ∈ E such
that for each e ∈ E we have G(t, e)αe = αte F (t, e) and G(h, e)αe = αhe F (h, e).
8                       1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


    It is not hard to check that all Abelian operations on sheaves, e.g., taking
kernels, taking direct sums, checking exactness, can be done “vertexwise and edge-
wise,” i.e., F1 → F2 → F3 is exact iff for all P ∈ VG ∐ EG , we have F1 (P ) →
F2 (P ) → F3 (P ) is exact. This is actually well known, since our sheaves are
presheaves of vector spaces on a category (see [Fri05] or Proposition I.3.1 of
[sga72a]).
    The following theorem results from a straightforward application of classical
homological algebra.
Theorem 1.4. To each “short exact sequence” of sheaves, i.e.,
                                  0 → F1 → F2 → F3 → 0
(in which the kernel of each arrow is the image of the preceding arrow), there is a
natural long exact sequence of homology groups
        0 → H1 (F1 ) → H1 (F2 ) → H1 (F3 ) → H0 (F1 ) → H0 (F2 ) → H0 (F3 ) → 0.
    1.2.2. Quasi-Betti Numbers and Maximum Excess. For any digraph,
G, we have that the pair h0 , h1 assign non-negative integers to each sheaf over G,
and these integers satisfy certain properties. In this chapter we introduce other
pairs of invariants, essentially variations of h0 , h1 , that satisfy the same properties.
Our proof of the SHNC will use the fact that the “maximum excess” is part of such
a pair. Let us make these notions precise.
Definition 1.5. A sequence of real numbers, x0 , . . . , xr is a triangular sequence if
for any i = 1, . . . , r − 1 we have
                                       xi ≤ xi−1 + xi+1 .
Definition 1.6. Given a digraph, G, and a field, F, consider the category of sheaves
of F-vector spaces on G. Let α0 , α1 be two functions from sheaves to the non-
negative reals. We shall say that (α0 , α1 ) is a quasi-Betti number pair (for G and
F) provided that:
        (1) for each sheaf, F , we have
(1.2)                              α0 (F ) − α1 (F ) = χ(F );
        (2) for any sheaves, F1 , F2 on G we have
                     αi (F1 ⊕ F2 ) = αi (F1 ) + αi (F2 )       for i = 0, 1;
        (3) for any short exact sequence of sheaves on G
                                  0 → F1 → F2 → F3 → 0,
            the sequence of integers
                  0, α1 (F1 ), α1 (F2 ), α1 (F3 ), α0 (F1 ), α0 (F2 ), α0 (F3 ), 0
            is triangular.
Moreover, we say that a function, α, from sheaves to non-negative reals is a first
quasi-Betti number if the pair (α0 , α1 ) with
                         α1 (F ) = α(F ),      α0 (F ) = χ(F ) + α(F )
                     1.2. BASIC DEFINITIONS AND MAIN RESULTS                          9


     are quasi-Betti number pair. The relationship between quasi-Betti numbers
and a first quasi-Betti numbers is forced by equation (1.2).
     Notice that (h0 , h1 ) is a quai-Betti number pair; the only issue in establishing
this is property (3) of the definition, and this follows from the long exact sequence
given by Theorem 1.4.
     Of course, if (α0 , α1 ) is a quasi-Betti number pair, then clearly α1 is a first
quasi-Betti number.
     Let us give other quasi-Betti number pairs, beginning with the one of main
interest in this paper.
Definition 1.7. Let F be a sheaf on a digraph, G. For any U ⊂ F (V ) we define
the head/tail neighbourhood of U , denoted Γht (G, F , U ), or simply Γht (U ), to be
                             M
(1.3)             Γht (U ) =    {w ∈ F (e) | dh (w), dt (w) ∈ U };
                             e∈EG

we define the excess of F at U to be
                                                   
                      excess(F , U ) = dim Γht (U ) − dim(U ).
Furthermore we define the maximum excess of F to be
                          m.e.(F ) =     max       excess(F , U ).
                                       U⊂F (VG )

    We shall see that the excess is a supermodular function, and hence the maxi-
mum excess occurs on a lattice of subsets of F (V ). It is not hard to see that for
the structure sheaf, F, we have
                                    m.e.(F) = ρ(G).
It is instructive to determine which subsets of F(VG ) obtain this maximum excess
of ρ(G). So let G′ be obtained from G by discarding all components with positive
Euler characteristic and, optionally, discarding some components of zero Euler char-
acteristic, and then, optionally repeatedly pruning any of its leaves (i.e., removing a
vertex of degree one and its incident edge); then the excess of U (G′ ) = ⊕v∈VG′ F(v)
of F on G is ρ(G), and, conversely, any subspace U ⊂ F(VG ) achieving the maxi-
mum excess of ρ(G) is of the form U (G′ ) for a G′ as above. The reader can easily
see that such U (G′ ) form a lattice (i.e., are closed under intersection and sum).
Theorem 1.8. The maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti number.
     Theorem 1.8 will be crucial to our proof of the SHNC (although, as mentioned
before, in an alternate proof we avoid the need for this theorem). Somewhat sur-
prisingly, the statement of this theorem and all the necessary definitions do not
involve any homology theory.
     We shall show Theorem 1.8 by identifying the maximum excess with a certain
“limit” Betti number.

     1.2.3. Twisted Homology. One graph theoretic reformulation of the SHNC
involves the reduced cyclicity defined in equation (1.1). This definition seems diffi-
cult to deal with, because of the max(0, h1 (X) − 1) term, and of the possibility of
h1 (X) = 0 for some components, X, of G. For a digraph, G, one can realize ρ(G) as
a “twisted first Betti number;” constructing this “twisted homology theory” is our
first step towards showing that the maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti number.
10                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


    Let us first briefly motivate our definitions of twisted homology. We begin by
noticing that for G connected we have
(1.4)                           ρ(G) = lim h1 (Ln )/n,
                                         n→∞
where for each positive integer n we choose a covering Ln → G of degree n such that
Ln is connected (for then h0 (L1 ) = 1 and h1 (Ln ) = h0 (Ln ) − χ(Ln ) = 1 + nρ(G)).
     One way of choosing n and Ln → G of degree n such that Ln is connected is
to take n = p a prime number, and take Lp → G to be a “generic” Z/pZ covering
of G (see Section 1.3). It is well known that for Z/pZ coverings G′ → G, or for any
Abelian covering, the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix of G′ can be computed
from those of G after “twisting” appropriately; here “twisting” means multiplying
the entries of G’s adjacency matrix by appropriate roots of unity, according to the
characters of the “Galois group” of G′ over G (see Section 1.3). The same holds
for homology groups.
     This leads us to a new homology theory, as follows. Let F be a sheaf of F-vector
spaces on a digraph, G, and let F′ be a field containing F. A twist or F′ -twist, ψ,
on G is a map
                                     ψ : EG → F′ .
By the twisting of F by ψ, denoted F ψ , we mean the sheaf of F′ -vector spaces given
via                                             
                               F ψ (P ) = F (P ) ⊗F F′
for all P ∈ VG ∐ EG , and
                    F ψ (h, e) = F (h, e),   F ψ (t, e) = ψ(e)F (t, e),
where F (h, e) and F (t, e) are viewed as F′ -linear maps arising from their original
F-linear maps. In other words, F ψ is the sheaf on the same vector spaces extended
to F′ -vector spaces, but with the tail restriction maps twisted by ψ. The map, dF ψ ,
viewed as a matrix, has entries in the field F′ . The groups Hi (F ψ ) are defined as
F′ -vector spaces.
     Now let ψ = {ψ(e)}e∈EG be viewed as |EG | indeterminates, and let F(ψ) denote
the field of rational functions in the ψ(e) over F. Then d = dF ψ can be viewed as
a morphism of finite dimensional vector spaces over F(ψ), given by a matrix with
entries in F(ψ).
Definition 1.9. We define the i-th twisted homology group of F , denoted by
                              Hitwist (F ) = Hitwist (F , ψ),
for i = 0, 1, respectively, to be the cokernel and kernel, respectively, of dF ψ described
above as a morphism of F(ψ) vector spaces. We define the i-th twisted Betti number
of F , denoted htwist
                  i   (F ), to be dimension of Hitwist (F ).
     We easily see, akin to equation (1.4), that
                                   ρ(G) = htwist
                                           1     (F).
The analogous short/long exact sequences theorem holds in twisted homology, and
this easily implies that htwist
                           1    is a quasi-Betti number. We wish to mention that we
can interpret
                     htwist
                      0     (F) = χ(F) + htwist
                                           1    (F) = χ(G) + ρ(G)
as the number of “acyclic components” of G, i.e., the number of connected compo-
nents that are free of cycles.
                     1.2. BASIC DEFINITIONS AND MAIN RESULTS                           11


    1.2.4. Maximum Excess Versus Twisted Betti Numbers, and The
Unhappy 4-Bundle. Note that for the constant sheaf, F, on a digraph, G, the
values of htwist
            1    and the maximum excess agree and equal ρ(G). Notice also that it is
immediate that htwist
                   1   is a first quasi-Betti number, but it seems to us more difficult
to show that the maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti number. This indicates that
it would be easier to work with htwist
                                    1    rather than the maximum excess in studying
the SHNC (and this can be done). We give two reasons why we nonetheless use
the maximum excess.
    First, the SHNC is more directly related to the vanishing maximum excess of a
certain sheaves we call ρ-kernels; and this vanishing is weaker (at least a priori) than
the vanishing of htwist
                     1   of the ρ-kernels. Second, the Euler characteristic, reduced
cyclicity, and the maximum excess have a nice scaling property under “pullbacks”
via covering maps, that htwist
                             1     does not share. This makes htwist
                                                                  1     seem to be, at
times, the “wrong” invariant for certain situations, like those arising in the SHNC.
    Let us discuss the above remarks in more precise terms. It is easy to see that
                                   htwist
                                    1     (F ) ≥ m.e.(F ),
and one can show that equality holds if for each e ∈ EG , F (e) is either zero or
one dimensional. In particular, this holds for F = CL for any subgraph, L of
G. However, there are sheaves, such as the “unhappy 4-bundle,” that we will soon
describe, which have maximum excess zero but positive htwist
                                                         1    . The above inequality
does show that if htwist
                    1     vanishes then so does the maximum excess; in the case of
the SHNC and ρ-kernels this means that vanishing htwist
                                                      1    of ρ-kernels is at least as
strong a condition as the SHNC.
    We now describe a sheaf we call the unhappy 4-bundle. It is a highly instructive
example that illustrates a number of points on maximum excess and twisted ho-
mology. Let B2 be the bouquet of two self-loops, i.e., the digraph with one vertex,
v, and two self-loops, e1 , e2 . Let U be defined as
(1.5)                   U(v) = F4 ,      U(ei ) = F2   for i = 1, 2,
and
                                                                    
                          1    0     1   0             0     0   0   0
                         0    1     0   0          0      0   1   0
(1.6)                    
                    dh =                 ,         
                                                dt =                  ,
                          0    0     0   1            1     0   0   0
                          0    0     0   0             0     1   0   1
where these matrices multiply the coordinates of U(E) arranged as a column vector
(the column vector to the right of the matrix), where U(E)’s coordinates are ordered
as U(e1 )⊕U(e2 ). The twisted incidence matrix of U (which characterizes U) is given
by
                                                              
                              1         0         1        0
                          0            1      −ψ(e2 )     0 
(1.7)             dU ψ = 
                         −ψ(e1 )
                                                               .
                                        0         0        1 
                              0       −ψ(e1 )     0     −ψ(e2 )
This matrix has a kernel of dimension one in F(ψ), however its maximum excess
is zero. Equivalently, if F (v) = F4 has α, β, γ, δ as its standard basis (i.e., α =
(1, 0, 0, 0), β = (0, 1, 0, 0), etc.), then the image of the four standard coordinates on
12                      1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


F (E) via dU ψ is
(1.8) ν1 = α − ψ(e1 )γ,       ν2 = β − ψ(e1 )δ,       ν3 = α − ψ(e2 )β,       ν4 = γ − ψ(e2 )δ.
The fact that htwist
               1     (U) 6= 0 follows from the simple computation that
                                    ν1 ∧ ν2 ∧ ν3 ∧ ν4 = 0
or the linear dependence relation
                             ν1 − ψ(e2 )ν2 − ν3 + ψ(e1 )ν4 = 0
The reason we call U a 4-bundle is that is four dimensional at the vertex of B2 , and
it is has properties akin to a vector bundle; this will be explained more fully in a
sequel to this paper.
     For any sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, and any morphism φ : K → G of directed
graphs, we define the pullback of F via φ to be the sheaf φ∗ F on K given via
                    (φ∗ F )(P ) = F (φ(P ))         for all P ∈ VK ∐ EK ,
and for all e ∈ EK ,
                 (φ∗ F )(h, e) = F (h, φ(e)),      (φ∗ F )(t, e) = F (t, φ(e)).
It is easy to see that if µ is a covering map of degree deg(µ) then
                                   χ(µ∗ F ) = deg(µ)χ(F ),
and, with a little more work (and using Galois graph theory, oddly enough), that
(1.9)                           m.e.(µ∗ F ) = deg(µ)m.e.(F ).
The “unhappy 4-bundle” also shows that htwist    1    does not enjoy this “scaling by
deg(µ) under pullback” property. Indeed, htwist  1   (U) = 1; however if φ : G′ → B2
(recall U is defined on the graph B2 ) is the degree two cover of B2 in which the
G′ edges mapping to e1 are self-loops, and the edges mapping to e2 are not, then
htwist
 1     (φ∗ U) = 0. In other words, via taking wedge products or solving for a linear
relation, it is straightforward to verify the linear independence of the eight vectors
 ν11 = α1 − ψ(e11 )γ 1 , ν21 = β 1 − ψ(e11 )δ 1 , ν31 = α1 − ψ(e12 )β 2 , ν41 = γ 1 − ψ(e12 )δ 2 .
 ν12 = α2 − ψ(e21 )γ 2 , ν22 = β 2 − ψ(e21 )δ 2 , ν32 = α2 − ψ(e22 )β 1 , ν42 = γ 2 − ψ(e22 )δ 1 .

    1.2.5. The Fundamental Lemma and Limit Homology. The following is
the main and most difficult theorem in this chapter; it allows us to connect twisted
homology and maximum excess. For any digraph we shall define the notion of its
Abelian girth, which is always at least as large as its girth.
Theorem 1.10. For any sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, let µ : G′ → G be a covering
map where the Abelian girth of G′ is at least
                                             
                       2 dim F (V ) + dim F (E) + 1.

Then
                                 htwist
                                  1     (µ∗ F ) = m.e.(µ∗ F ).
   From this lemma it is easy to see that the maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti
number.
                      1.2. BASIC DEFINITIONS AND MAIN RESULTS                          13


    1.2.6. Limits and Limiting Betti Numbers. In this subsection we give
a new interpretation to our main theorem, Theorem 1.10. For any two covering
maps,
                           φ1 : G1 → G and φ2 : G2 → G,
their fibre product
                                   φ : G1 ×G G2 → G
factors through both φ1 and φ2 , i.e., φ is a “common cover.” It follows that the set,
cov(G), of covering maps of a fixed digraph, G, is a directed set, under the partial
order φ1 ≤ φ2 if φ2 factors through φ1 . As such we may speak of limits in the usual
sense of limits of a directed sets; i.e., if f is, say, a real-valued function on covering
maps, then we write
                                       lim f (φ) = L
                                   φ∈cov(G)
if for any ǫ > 0 there is a φǫ ∈ cov(G) such that |f (φ′ ) − L| ≤ ǫ provided that φ′
factors through φǫ (such a limit, L, is necessarily unique).
     Theorem 1.10 implies that for any sheaf, F , on G, we have
                                                 htwist
                                                  1     (φ∗ F )
                           m.e.(F ) =      lim                  .
                                        φ∈cov(G)    deg(φ)
Of course, Theorem 1.10 amounts to saying that this limiting value is exactly at-
tained at any φ : G′ → G with G′ of sufficiently large girth or Abelian girth.
    For a sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, we define
                                           htwist
                                            i     (F )
                                     lim
                                   φ∈cov(G) deg(φ)

to be the i-th limiting Betti number, which we denote hlim
                                                       i (F ). Evidently,

                  hlim
                   1 (F ) = m.e.(F ),      hlim
                                            0 (F ) = χ(F ) + m.e.(F ).
It is easy to see that the limit of quasi-Betti pairs is also a quasi-Betti pair, and
that for any fixed covering map φ : G′ → G, the functions for i = 0, 1 given by
                                  htwist
                                   i     (φ∗ F )/ deg(φ)
form a quasi-Betti pair. This is another way of saying that Theorem 1.10 implies
Theorem 1.8.
     1.2.7. Sheaves, Adjacency Matrices, and Laplacians. We remark that
from the incidence matrix, dF = dh − dt , of a sheaf, F , one can define a Lapla-
cians, adjacency matrices, and related matrices that are analogues of those used
for graphs. This construction can also be viewed as a very special, discrete case of
Hodge theory. We require that for each P ∈ VG ∐ EG , we have that each F (P )
be endowed with an inner product. In that way F (V ), F (E) become inner product
spaces, and we have adjoint operators d∗h , d∗t and d∗ = d∗h − d∗t from F (V ) to F (E).
We define
                                 ∆0 = dd∗ , ∆1 = d∗ d
to be the Laplacians of F , which, of course, depend on the inner products chosen
for the values, F (P ), of F ; we easily see that ∆i is an operator on F (V ) and F (E)
respectively for i = 0 and i = 1 respectively; if F is of characteristic zero, then
the ∆i are positive semi-definite operators, and the kernel of ∆i is Hi (F ). In the
special case F = F, with the same, standard inner products on all F (P ) = F, the
Laplacians become the usual Laplacians of the graph.
14                   1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


     Furthermore, given F and inner products on the values of F , we get general-
izations of the adjacency matrix and degree matrix. For example, if we set
                      D0 = dh d∗h + dt d∗t ,    A0 = dh d∗t + dt d∗h ,
we have that ∆0 = D0 −A0 ; in the case F = F and standard inner products, D0 , A0 ,
respectively amount to the usual degree and adjacency matrices, respectively. One
can define D1 , A1 analogously.
    One could define a sheaf to be regular in the way that one would define a graph
to be regular, i.e., if both D0 and D1 are both multiples of the identity. One could
measure the expansion of a sheaf by the eigenvalues of A0 , A1 or ∆0 , ∆1 .
    We believe that the spectral theory of such matrices and related properties such
as expansion could be quite interesting to pursue. However, we shall not pursue
them further in this paper.

                       1.3. Galois and Covering Theory
    In this section we establish a number of important definitions and facts con-
cerning graph coverings, Abelian coverings, and Galois coverings.
    There is a collection of facts about number fields that may be called Galois
theory; this would include classical Galois theory, but also more recent statements
such as if k ′ is a Galois extension field of k, then
                                                M
                                  k ′ ⊗k k ′ ≃        k′
                                               Aut(k′ /k)

(see [Del77], Section I.5.1). Such facts have analogues in graph theory, which one
might call “graph Galois theory.” Such facts were described in [Fri93, ST96];
at least some of these some of these facts were known much earlier, in [Gro77];
since these facts are fairly simple and quite powerful, we presume they may occur
elsewhere in the literature (perhaps only implicitly).
      1.3.1. Galois Theory of Graphs. We shall summarize some theorems of
[Fri93]; the reader is referred to there and [ST96] for more discussion. In this arti-
cle Galois group actions, when written multiplicatively (i.e., not viewed as functions
or morphisms) will be written on the right, since our Cayley graphs are written with
its generators acting on the left.
      Let π : K → G be a covering map of digraphs. We write Aut(π), or somewhat
abusively Aut(K/G) (when π is understood), for the automorphisms of K over G,
i.e., the digraph automorphisms ν : K → K such that π = πν.
      Now assume that K and G are connected. Then it is easy to see ([Fri93, ST96])
that for every v1 , v2 ∈ VK there is at most one ν ∈ Aut(K/G) such that ν(v1 ) = v2 ;
the same holds with edges instead of vertices. It follows that |Aut(K/G)| ≤ [K : G],
with equality iff Aut(K/G) acts transitively on each vertex and edge fibre of π. In
this case we say that π is Galois.
      If π : K → G is Galois but K is not connected, |Aut(K/G)| can be as large as
[K : G] factorial (if K is a number of copies of G). So when K is not connected,
we say that a covering map π : K → G is Galois provided that we additionally
specify a subgroup, G, of Aut(K/G) of that acts simply (without fixed points)
and transitively on each of the vertex and edge fibres of π; we declare G to be
the Galois group. Again, this additional specification does not change any of the
theorems here, although it does mean that certain π : K → G can be Galois on
                          1.3. GALOIS AND COVERING THEORY                                 15


each component of G without being Galois in our sense (consider G = G1 ∐ G2 , and
Ki = π −1 (Gi ), where G1 , G2 are connected and Aut(Ki /Gi ) are non-isomorphic
groups).
Theorem 1.11 (Normal Extension Theorem). If π : G → B is a covering map of
digraphs, there is a covering map µ : K → G such that πµ is Galois.
      In this situation we say that K is a normal extension of G (assuming the maps
µ and π are understood). By convention, all graphs are finite in the paper unless
otherwise specified. Generally speaking, we will not address infinite graphs in the
context of Galois theory; however, if the π : G → B in this theorem is a morphism
of finite degree, even if G and B are infinite digraphs, then the proof of the Normal
Extension Theorem due to Gross is still valid.
      Let us outline two proofs of the Normal Extension Theorem. The proof in
[Fri93] uses the fact that G corresponds to a subgroup, S, of index n = |VG | of
the group π1 (B), the fundamental group of B (which is the free group on h1 (B)
elements). The intersection of xSx−1 over a set of coset representatives of π1 (B)/S
is a normal subgroup, N , of finite size (at worst nn , since there are n cosets and
each xSx−1 is of index n); π(B)/N then naturally corresponds to a Galois cover
K → B of at most nn vertices.
      There is a very pretty proof of the Normal Extension Theorem discovered earlier
by Jonathan Gross in [Gro77], giving a better bound on the number of vertices
of K. For any positive integer k at most n = |VG |, let Ωk (G) be the subgraph of
G ×B G ×B · · · ×B G (multiplied k times) induced on the set of vertices of the form
(v1 , . . . , vk ) where vi 6= vj for all i, j with i 6= j. Each Ωk (G) admits a covering map
to G by projecting onto any one of its components. But Ωn (G), which has edge
and vertex fibers of size n!, is Galois by the natural, transitive action of Sn (the
symmetric group on n elements) on Ωn (G). So Ωn (G) is a Galois cover of degree
at most n! over B.
    1.3.2. Galois Coordinates. Given a graph, G, and a group, G, consider the
task of describing all Galois covering maps π : K → G with Galois group G; consider
also the task of giving a meaning to a “random” such Galois covering (i.e., describe
a natural probability space whose atoms are such coverings). This can be done in
a number of ways, via Galois coordinates or the monodromy map. Here we shall
review these ideas and apply them. These ideas occur (in parts) in many places in
the literature; see, for example, [Fri08, Fri03, AL02, Fri93].
    Again, fix a graph, G, and a group, G. By Galois coordinates on G with values
in G we mean a choice of ae ∈ G for each e ∈ EG . From the {ae } we build a covering
map φ : K → G by taking VK = VG × G and taking EK = EG × G with the head
and tail, respectively, of an edge (e, a) being
(1.10)               hK (e, a) = (hG e, ae a),   tK (e, a) = (tG e, a),
respectively. We define a G action on K via g ∈ G is the morphism such that for
P ∈ VG ∐ EG and a ∈ G, g sends (P, a) to
(1.11)                              (P, a)g = (P, ag);
in view of the fact that ae multiplies to the left in equation (1.10), we see that
the right multiplication of g on a in equation (1.11) actually defines a digraph
morphism. Let φ be projection onto the first coordinate. Clearly φ is a Galois
covering with Galois group G.
16                       1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


     Conversely, let φ : K → G be any G Galois covering. We may identify VK with
VG × G by choosing for each v ∈ VG an element v ′ ∈ VK such that φ(v ′ ) = v and
declaring v ′ to have coordinates (v, 1) where 1 is the identity in G; we say that v ′
is the origin for v in K; then for all v ′′ ∈ VK with φ(v ′′ ) = v there is a unique
g ∈ G with v ′′ = v ′ g, and we declare v ′′ to have coordinates (v, g). For any g ′ ∈ G
we have v ′′ g ′ = vgg ′ which has coordinates (v, gg ′ ); hence g ′ acts on coordinates by
right multiplication. Now choose an edge e′ ∈ EK , and let e = φ(e′ ); there exist
unique ae′ , g ∈ G for which the endpoints of e′ have coordinates
                               te′ = (te, g),       he′ = (he, ae′ g).
But the G action on K then shows that for any g ′ we have
                        t(e′ g ′ ) = (te, gg ′ ),   h(e′ g ′ ) = (he, ae′ gg ′ ).
It follows that ae′ depends only on e = φ(e′ ), i.e., ae′ = ae′ g′ for all e′ ∈ K and
g ′ ∈ G. In other words, there is a unique ae for each e ∈ EG such that the φ fibres
of e join (tG e, g) to (hG e, ae g) for each g ∈ G. In summary, for each choice of an
element in the vertex fibres we get Galois coordinates (and conversely).
     Notice that in setting the coordinates on VK , if for v ∈ VG we choose a different
origin, namely v ′ gv instead of v ′ , then we have v ′ g = (v ′ gv )gv−1 g for any g ∈ G; it
follows that the vertx v ′ g, which would have had coordinates (v, g) with v ′ as origin,
will have coordinates (v, gv−1 g) with v ′ g as origin. In particular, if for e′ ∈ VK and
e = φ(e) we have te′ = (te, g) and he′ = (he, ae g) in one set of coordinates for some
g, and the origins of te and he are respectively translated by gte and ghe , then in
the new coordinates
                                       −1                       −1
                           te′ = (te, gte g),       he′ = (he, ghe ae g).
               −1
Setting g ′ = gte g, it follows that in the new, translated coordinates we have te′ =
      ′        ′
(te, g ) and he = (he, e ae g ′ ), where
                                                 −1
                                           e
                                           ae = ghe ae gte .
So changing Galois coordinate origins as such amounts to a transformation of Galois
coordinates
                                                   −1
(1.12)                                 ae 7→ e
                                             ae = ghe ae gte
for a family {gv }v∈VG of G values indexed on VG .
     Galois coordinates give a nice model of a random Galois cover of a given graph
with given Galois group—just choose the each ae uniformly in G, assuming G is
finite, and independently over the e ∈ EG . If one wants a model of a random
cover, one that is not Galois, one often chooses VK to have vertices VG × {1, . . . , n},
where n is the degree of the cover, and chooses random matchings over each G edge
(random permutations over self-loops); see, e.g., [Fri08, Fri03, AL02].
    1.3.3. Walks and Monodromy. Another type of coordinates for Galois cov-
erings are the monodromy maps. For this we need to fix some notation regarding
walks in a digraph.
Definition 1.12. Let G be a digraph. By an oriented edge of G we mean a formal
symbol e+ or e− where e ∈ EG . We extend the head and tail map to oriented edges
via he+ = te− = he and te+ = he− = te. We say that the inverse of e+ is e− and
vice versa. An undirected walk (or simply walk) in G is an alternating sequence
of vertices and oriented edges w = (v0 , f1 , v1 , f2 , v2 , . . . , fr , vr ) with hfi = vi , tfi =
                          1.3. GALOIS AND COVERING THEORY                                17


vi−1 for i = 1, . . . , r; we call r its length; we say that w is closed if vr = v0 ; we say
that w is non-backtracking or reduced if for each i = 1, . . . , r − 1, fi and fi+1 are
not inverses of each other.
     If G is a digraph and v ∈ VG , then we define π1 (G, v) to be the group of non-
backtracking closed walks about v, where the group operation is concatenation of
walks (which we reduce until they are non-backtracking). This, of course, is isomor-
phic to the usual fundamental group, π1 (G,e v), where G  e is the geometric realization
of G, where vertices of G correspond to points and edges of G correspond to unit
intervals. If G is connected, then π1 (G, v) is a free group on h1 (G) generators. We
may also describe π1 (G, v) as the classes of closed walks about v, where two walks
are equivalent if they reduce to the same non-backtracking word (“reduce” meaning
repeatedly eliminating any two consecutive steps of the walk that traverse an edge
and then its inverse).
     Let φ : G′ → G be Galois with Galois group G, with G connected, and let {ae }
be Galois coordinates for φ. Extend the {ae } to be defined on oriented edges via
ae+ = ae , ae− = a−1e . Fix a v ∈ VG . Then for any closed walk, w, about v in G, we
let ei be the oriented edge traversed by w on the i-th step and set
                            Mndrmyφ,{ae } (w) = aek . . . ae1 ,
where {ae }e∈EG are Galois coordinates on φ. We call Mndrmyφ,{ae } the monodromy
map with respect to {ae }; it is a group morphism from π1 (G, v) to G. Conversely,
given a group morphism
                                  M : π1 (G, v) → G
with G connected, we can form a covering φ : G′ → G with Galois coordinates {ae }
such that Mndrmyφ,{ae } = M ; indeed, we let T be an undirected spanning tree
for G, define ae = 1 for e ∈ ET (where 1 denotes the identity in G), and define ae
for e ∈ EG \ ET by taking an element γ ∈ π1 (G, v) composed entirely of ET edges
except for one edge e (traversed in the same orientation as e) and set ae = M (e);
since π1 (G, v) is a free group on EG \ ET , this implies that M is well-defined and
equals Mndrmyφ,{ae } .
     If we change Galois coordinates on φ, then according to equation (1.12) we get
a conjugate element. Hence there is a natural map:
                         Mndrmyφ : π1 (G, v) → ConjClass(G).
If v ′ ∈ VG has a path, p, to v, then the map γ 7→ pγp−1 gives a homomorphism
π1 (G, v) → π1 (G, v ′ ), and the two monodromy maps, respectively, send γ and pγp−1
to the same conjugacy class; hence we get a map
                          Mndrmyφ : π1 (G) → ConjClass(G)
independent of the base point (for G connected). Any notion defined on conjugacy
classes of G becomes defined on π1 (G) via monodromy. For example, if G is Abelian,
then the conjugacy classes of G are the same as G, and we get a homomorphism
                                Mndrmyφ : π1 (G) → A,
                     ′
for any cover φ : G → G with Abelian Galois group A (compare this to the dis-
cussion of torsors in Section 5.2 of [Fri93]). We remark that if the monodromy
map is onto A, and G is connected then G′ is connected; indeed, this means that
any two vertices in the same fiber are connected, since any vertex in G′ has a path
18                   1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


to a vertex in any vertex fibre (lifted from the element of π1 (G) that maps to the
appropriate element of A); hence we can connect any two vertices via a path.

   1.3.4. Covering maps and ρ. Here we describe a remarkable property of ρ
under covering maps.

Theorem 1.13. For any covering map π : K → G of degree d, we have χ(K) =
dχ(G) and ρ(K) = dρ(G).

    Proof. The claim on χ follows since d = |VK |/|VG | = |EK |/|EG |. To show the
claim on ρ, it suffices to consider the case of G connected, the general case obtained
by summing over connected components; but similarly it suffices to consider the
case of K connected. In this case
                                                                  
         ρ(G) = h1 (G) − 1 = −χ(G) = −dχ(K) = d h1 (K) − 1 = dρ(K).

                                                                                    


                      1.4. Sheaf Theory and Homology
    In this section we define sheaves of vector spaces over a graph, G, and their
homology groups, and give their basic properties. Then we explain the definitions
and properties in terms of sheaf theory on Grothendieck topologies; in case G
has no self-loops, we describe a topological space, Top(G), whose sheaves give an
equivalent description of our notion of sheaf.
    In the first subsection we describe everything in simple terms, giving some
claims without proof; the reader can either prove them from scratch, or wait until
the second subsection where we explain that all of these claims are special cases of
well-known results.

    1.4.1. Homology and Pullbacks. The basic definitions of sheaves were given
in Subsection 1.2.1. In this subsection we prove Theorem 1.4 and discuss pullbacks
and related functors.

    Proof (of Theorem 1.4). By the “vertexwise and edgewise” nature of tak-
ing images and kernels, we see that we have a diagram
                              0             0              0

                              ❄             ❄             ❄
                0       ✲ F1 (E)      ✲ F2 (E)      ✲ F3 (E)     ✲ 0


                              ❄             ❄             ❄
                0       ✲ F1 (V )     ✲ F2 (V )     ✲ F3 (V )    ✲ 0


                               ❄             ❄              ❄
                              0             0              0
The theorem follows from the standard “delta” or “connecting” map in homological
algebra, via the “snake lemma” (see [Lan02, AM69, HS97]).                     
                        1.4. SHEAF THEORY AND HOMOLOGY                              19


    Next we describe the functoriality of sheaves. For any sheaf, F , on a graph, G,
and any morphism φ : K → G of directed graphs, recall from Subsection 1.2.4 that
the “pullback” sheaf φ∗ F on K is defined via
                  (φ∗ F )(P ) = F (φ(P ))      for all P ∈ VK ∐ EK ,
and for all e ∈ EK ,
               (φ∗ F )(h, e) = F (h, φ(e)),   (φ∗ F )(t, e) = F (t, φ(e)).
     If F is a sheaf on G and K is a subgraph of G, then there is a sheaf on G
denoted FK called “F restricted to K and extended by zero,” defined by (FK )(P )
is 0 if P ∈
          / VK ∐ EK , and otherwise F (P ); the restriction maps are inherited from
F (when 0 is not involved). Notice that in case F = F, then we have
(1.13)                   FK (VG ) = FVK ,     FK (EG ) = FEK ,
and d = dh − dt is the standard incidence matrix of K; hence Hi (FK ) ≃ Hi (K).
    If φ : K → G is an arbitrary map, and F a sheaf on K, there is a natural sheaf
φ! F on G defined as follows:
                                 M
                  (φ! F )(P ) =        F (Q), ∀P ∈ VG ∐ EG ,
                                Q∈φ−1 (P )

with the restriction maps induced from those of F , i.e., (φ! F )(h, e) is the sum of
the maps taking, for e′ ∈ φ−1 (e), the F (e′ ) component of (φ! F )(e) to the F (he′ )
component of (φ! F )(he) via the map F (h, e′ ). The reader can now observe that
(1.14)             (φ! F )(VG ) ≃ F (VK ),    (φ! F )(EG ) ≃ F (EK ),
and dφ! F is the same map as dF modulo these isomorphisms; hence
(1.15)                            Hi (φ! F ) ≃ Hi (F )
for i = 0, 1. In Subsection 1.4.3 we prove that φ! is the left adjoint of φ∗ , and
in particular the isomorphisms of homology groups above are immediate; in Sub-
section 1.4.4 we explain the role of φ! in certain “vanishing theorems” (of sheaf
invariants). We shall make special use of φ! for φ étale in our approach to the
SHNC (see Theorems 1.16 and 2.14).
    If φ : K → G is the inclusion of a subgraph, and F is a sheaf on G, then FK ,
defined before, equals φ! φ∗ F . More generally we write FK for φ! φ∗ F for arbitrary
φ, provided that φ is understood in context. Since φ∗ F = F for arbitrary φ, we
always have FK = φ! F. This observation, combined with equation (1.15), gives
another proof that Hi (FK ) is canonically isomorphic to Hi (K) for i = 0, 1; this
proof, based on adjoints, is less explicit than the proof based on equation (1.13)
and the remarks just below it.
    The tensor product of two sheaves on G is defined as the tensor product their
values at each point and each vertex, as F-vector spaces. Note that if φ : K → G is
an arbitrary morphism of digraphs, and F is a sheaf on G, we easily verify that
                              FK = φ! φ∗ F = F ⊗ FK ,
and if K ′ → G is another morphism we have an isomophism of sheaves on G
(1.16)                         FK ⊗ FK ′ ≃ FK×G K ′ .
Furthermore, if L → G is an arbitrary digraph morphism, we have an equality of
sheaves on K,
                               φ∗ FL = FK×G L .
20                       1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


    If G′ ⊂ G, then there is a natural inclusion of sheaves on G, FG′ → F (but not
generally any nonzero morphism from F = FG to FG′ ).
    If φ : K → G is a morphism of graphs, and α : F1 → F2 is a morphism of
sheaves on K, then we have natural a natural morphism
                                     φ! α : φ! F1 → φ! F2 ,
that make φ! a functor on the category of sheaves. Similarly for φ∗ , and for the
pullback, φ∗ (which acts the other way, from sheaves and their morphisms on G to
those on K).
     1.4.2. Standard Sheaf Theories. In this subsection we explain the con-
nections with classical sheaf theory on topological spaces. We then describe our
definitions and particular choice of homology theory (and the role of φ! ) in terms
of the view of Grothendieck et al. ([sga72a, sga72b, sga73, sga77]).
     First consider an arbitrary topological space on a finite set, X. Say that an
open set, U , in X is irreducible if U is nonempty2 and not the union of its proper
subsets. It is known that the category of sheaves on X is equivalent to the category
of presheaves on the irreducible open subsets; this can be proven directly—the
essential idea is that if a set is not irreducible, then we can construct its value at
a sheaf from those on its subsets; there is also a proof in Section 2.5 of [Fri05],
where this fact follows easily from the Comparison Lemma of [sga72a], Exposé III,
4.1. As is pointed out in [Fri05], this theorem is valid for any finite semitopological
Grothendieck topology, where semitopological means that the underlying category
has only one morphism from any object to itself.
     For example, if X = {A, B, C, D} with irreducible open sets being {A}, {C},
{A, B, C}, and {A, D, C}. Then one can recover a sheaf on X (which has seven
open sets) on the basis of its values on these four sets, and any presheaf on these
four sets extends to a sheaf on X. We remark that X geometrically corresponds
(see [Fri05]) to a circle, X, covered by two overlapping intervals, the intervals
corresponding to {A, B, C} and {A, D, C}. We have hi (X) = 1 for i = 0, 1.
     Let G be a digraph with no self-loops. In this case our sheaf theory agrees with a
standard topological one. Namely, let Top(G) be the topological space on VG ∐ EG ,
whose open sets are subgraphs of G. There are two types of open irreducible sets:
those of the form {v} with v ∈ VG , and those of the form {he, e, te} with e ∈ EG ;
for each e we have {he} and {te} are subsets of {he, e, te}, and hence a sheaf on
Top(G) is determined by its values on the sets of type {v} and {he, e, te} and the
restrictions from the values on {he, e, te} to both {he} and {te}. We therefore
recover our definition of a sheaf on a graph (i.e., Definition 1.1).
     Note that in the above X = {A, B, C, D} definition, this is equivalent to Top(G)
with VG = {A, C} and EG = {B, D} and any heads/tails correspondences making
this a graph of two vertices joined by two edges.
     Notice that the above construction also gives a space, Top(G), when G has self-
loops. But this space has the wrong properties and homology groups. For example,
if G has one vertex and one self-loop, then hi (G) = 1 for i = 0, 1 as defined in the
previous section; however, Top(G) amounts to one irreducible open lying in another
     2If the empty set were considered irreducible, the subcategory of irreducible open sets would
have an initial element, making the structure sheaf injective and giving the wrong homology
groups. One can say that the empty set is the union of proper subsets, namely the empty union;
as such the empty set is reducible “by definition.”
                          1.4. SHEAF THEORY AND HOMOLOGY                              21


(with only one inclusion, not the desired two), and we have h1 (Top(G)) = 0. So we
now give a Grothendieck topology for every digraph, G, that gives our sheaf and
homology theory.
     For each digraph, G, let Cat(G) be the category whose objects are VG ∐EG and
where the 2|EG | non-identity morphisms are given by he → e and te → e ranging
over all e ∈ EG (with two distinct morphisms he → e and te → e, even when
he = te). Then a sheaf over Cat(G) with the grossière topologie, i.e., a presheaf
over the category Cat(G), is just the notion of a sheaf given earlier. Again, if e is
a self-loop, then this category has two morphisms between two distinct objects; it
is easy to see that the category of sheaves over a graph with a self-loop cannot be
equivalent to the category of sheaves over any topological space.
     Notice that earlier definitions regarding sheaves on G and related matters often
involve a P in VG ∐ EG , giving vertices and edges a somewhat equal treatment;
this happens because VG and EG comprise the objects of Cat(G), and only the
morphisms of Cat(G) distinguish them.
     At this point we will use explain certain features of the homology theory we
use here. The proofs are in or are easy consequences of material in [Fri05], and is
mostly easily derivable from material in [sga72a, sga72b, sga73, sga77] (which
contains a lot of other material. . .). We shall assume the reader is familiar with
basic sheaf and cohomology theory found in any algebraic geometry text, such as
[Har77], and we will just list a few points that are not standard, or where the finite
graph situation is different. Let Sh(G) be the category of sheaves of vector spaces
(over some fixed field, F) on G.
      (1) Sh(G) have enough projectives as well as injectives. (See [Fri05] for a
          simple characterization of all injectives or projectives.)
      (2) If u : K → G is a morphism of graphs, the pullback, u∗ : Sh(G) → Sh(K)
          is defined via
                                  (u∗ F )(P ) = F (u(P ))
          for P ∈ VK ∐ EK , with its natural restriction maps inherited from F
          (this is the same pullback defined in Subsections 1.2.4 and 1.4.1); u∗ has
          a left adjoint, u! (defined in Subsection 1.4.1), and a right adjoint, u∗ (see
          [sga72a], Exposé I, Proposition 5.1). In other words,
(1.17)          HomG (φ! F , L) ≃ HomK (F , φ∗ L)    ∀F ∈ Sh(G), L ∈ Sh(K),
         and similarly for φ∗ .
     (3) As a consequence we have
(1.18)      ExtiG (φ! F , L) ≃ ExtiK (F , φ∗ L)   ∀F ∈ Sh(G), L ∈ Sh(K),
         and similarly for φ∗ .
     (4) If u : G′ → G is an inclusion of graphs, then u! F is just FG′ , i.e., the sheaf
         that is zero outside G′ and F when restricted to G′ .
     (5) Any sheaf, F , over G has an injective resolution
                                            !                                    !
        M                   M                      M                            
             (kv )∗ F (v) ⊕     (ke )∗ F (e) −→        (ke )∗ F (te) ⊕ F (he)
         v∈VG              e∈EG                      e∈EG

          where for P ∈ VG ∐ EG , kP denotes the morphism from the category,
          ∆0 , of one object and one (identity) morphism, to Cat(G) sending the
          object of ∆0 to P . In our case, this means that for a vector space, W ,
22                     1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


           we have (kP )∗ W has the value W d(Q) at Q, where d(Q) is the number
           of morphisms from Q to P . For F = F this is homotopy equivalent to a
           simpler resolution, namely
                                 M              M
(1.19)                      F→       (kv )∗ F →   (ke )∗ F
                                v∈VG               e∈EG

         (see the paragraph about greedy resolutions and “rank” order in Sec-
         tion 2.11 of [Fri05]).
     (6) Similarly, any sheaf, F , over G has a projective resolution
                                          !                                     !
       M                                      M                 M
            (kte )! F (e) ⊕ (khe )! F (e)   −→    (kv )! F (v) ⊕    (ke )! F (e)
         e∈EG                                      v∈VG              e∈EG

           Again, F (and numerous other sheaves encountered in practice) have a
           simpler (“rank” order) resolution:
                         M                    M
(1.20)                       (kv )! Fdv −1 →    (ke )! F → F,
                         v∈VG                   e∈EG

         where dv is the degree of v (the sum of the indegree and outdegree), and
         the dv − 1 represents the fact that Fdv −1 is really the kernel of the map
         Fdv → F which is addition of coordinates; similarly, in equation (1.19),
         the F in (ke )! F is really the cokernel of the diagonal inclusion F → F2 ,
         with the 2 in F2 coming from the fact that each edge is incident upon two
         vertices.
     (7) This means that the derived functors, Exti (F1 , F2 ), of Hom(F1 , F2 ) can
         be computed as the cohomology groups of
                M                           M                      
                     Hom F1 (v), F2 (v) ⊕         Hom F1 (e), F2 (e)
                v∈VG                            e∈EG
                            M                                   
                       −→          Hom F1 (e), F2 (te) ⊕ F2 (he)
                            e∈EG
     Now we can understand our choice of homology groups. From equations (1.19)
and (1.20), we see that the constant sheaf, F, has a simple injective resolution but
a more awkward projective resolution. So the homology theory that we’ve defined
earlier amounts to                                   ∨
                               Hi (F ) = Exti (F , F) ,
where ∨ denotes the dual space; we have
                                                                  
               h0 (F ) − h1 (F ) = χ(F ) = dim F (V ) − dim F (E) .
As an alternative, one could study the standard cohomology theory
                                   H i (F ) = Exti (F, F ).
But we easily see that
                                            X                   
     dim H 0 (F ) − dim H 1 (F ) = dim F (E) −   (dv − 1) dim F (v) .
                                                              v∈VG

This is another avenue to study, but does not seem to capture in a simple way the
invariant ρ = ρ(G) of a digraph, G.
    We remark that we could reverse the role of open and closed sets in this dis-
cussion. Indeed, to any sheaf, F , of finite dimensional F-vector spaces on a finite
                          1.4. SHEAF THEORY AND HOMOLOGY                                23


category, C, we can take the spaces dual to the F (P ) for objects, P , of C, thereby
getting a sheaf, F ∨ , defined on C opp , the category opposite to C (i.e., the category
obtained by reversing the arrows). Taking the opposite category has the effect of
exchanging open and closed sets, exchanging projectives and injectives, etc.
     Let us briefly explain the name “structure sheaf.” Generally speaking, in sheaf
theory each topological space or Grothendieck topology comes with a special sheaf
called the “structure sheaf” that has several properties. One key property is that
the “global sections” of a sheaf, F , should reasonably be interpreted as the sheaf
homomorphisms to F from the structure sheaf. This makes “global cosections,” on
which our homology theory is based, to be sheaf homomorphisms from F to the
“structure sheaf.” Hence we call F the structure sheaf.

      1.4.3. ν! , the left adjoint to ν ∗ . As mentioned in the previous subsection,
if ν : G′ → G is an arbitrary graph morphism, then ν ∗ has a left adjoint, ν! . In this
subsection we show that ν! is the left adjoint to ν∗ , based on the general construction
given in [sga72a]. Although ν ∗ has a right adjoint, ν∗ , for our homology theory it
is ν! that seems more important.
      The general construction of ν! is given in [sga72a], Exposé I, Proposition 5.1).
Alternatively, the reader can simply take the ν! that we describe and verify that it
satisfies equation (1.17).
      According to [sga72a], Exposé I, Proposition 5.1, given a sheaf, F , on a graph
G, i.e., a presheaf on Cat(G), the value ν! F (P ) for P ∈ VG ∐ EG is determined as
follows: form the category IνP whose objects are
       {(m, X) | X ∈ VG′ ∐ EG′ , m : P → ν(X) is a morphism in Cat(G)},
with a morphism from (m, X) to (m′ , X ′ ) being a morphism µ : X → X ′ in Cat(G′ )
such that m′ = ν(µ)m; then the projection (m, X) 7→ X followed by F gives a
contravariant functor from IνP to F-vector spaces, and we take the inductive limit
in IνP . It follows that if e ∈ EG , then Iνe is category whose objects are (ide , e′ )
where e′ lies over e, and ide is the identity at e. It follows that
                                             M
                              (ν! F )(e) =         F (e′ ).
                                               e′ ∈ν −1 (e)

If v ∈ VG , then Iνv contains the following:
      (1) (idv , v ′ ) for each v ′ over v;
      (2) (µ, e′ ) for every e′ ∈ EG′ over an e ∈ EG with he = v, with µ the morphism
              from v to e given by the head relation; and
       (3) the same with “tail” replacing “heads.”
We claim that each object (µ, e′ ) has a unique morphism in Iνv to an element
(idv , v ′ ), where v ′ = he′ in part (2) and v ′ = te′ in part (3). So the inductive limit
for (ν! F )(v) can be restricted to the subcategory of objects in part (1), and we
again get a direct sum:
                                                 M
                                  (ν! F )(v) =          F (v ′ ).
                                           v ′ ∈ν −1 (v)
We leave it to the reader to verify that the restriction maps of ν! F are just the
natural maps induced by F .
    Now we see that
                    (ν! F )(VG ) ≃ F (VG′ ),      (ν! F )(EG ) ≃ F (EG′ ),
24                   1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


with dν! F and dF identified under the isomorphism. Hence they have the same
homology groups, same adjacency matrix, etc. The main difference is that one is a
sheaf on G, the other a sheaf on G′ .
     1.4.4. ν! and Contagious Vanishing Theorems. In this section, we com-
ment that vanishing of homology groups of a sheaf implies the vanishing certain
homology groups of related sheaves. We call such results “contagious vanishing”
theorems. This gives a nice use of the sheaves ν! F. Let us first explain our interest
in such results, as motivated by the SHNC.
     As mentioned before, we will show that the SHNC is implied by the vanishing
maximum excess of a sheaf that we call a ρ-kernel. The ρ-kernel actually arises
when considering a trivial and very special case of the SHNC; however it turns out
that the vanishing of the maximum excess these ρ-kernels actually imply the entire
SHNC. What happens is that the trivial case of the SHNC, when expressed as a
short/long exact sequence, can be “tensored” with sheaves of the form ν! F; then
a general “contagious vanishing theorem” implies that the maximum excess of the
ρ-kernel tensored with ν! F vanishes; this proves all cases of the SHNC. In other
words, the vanishing of a homology group of a sheaf or of a related group can be
more powerful than it first seems. Let us describe the underlying ideas, which are
not specific to the SHNC.
     Let G′ ⊂ G be digraphs, and let G be a sheaf on F . Then we have an exact
sequence
                           0 → FG′ → F → F /FG′ → 0.
Of course, when G has no self-loops, then this is a special case of the general short
exact sequence
                             0 → FU → F → FZ → 0,
where F is a sheaf on a topological space, U is an open subset, and Z is the
closed complement (see [Har77], Chapter II, Exercise 1.19 or Chapter III, proof of
Theorem 2.7). The long exact sequence implies that if h1 (F ) = 0, then h1 (FG′ ) = 0.
Of course, the same is true of any first quasi-Betti number, and so we have the
following simple but useful theorem.
Theorem 1.14. If α1 is any first quasi-Betti number for sheaves of F-vector spaces
on a graph, G, and if α1 (F ) = 0 for such a sheaf, F , then for any subgraph, G′ , of
G we have α1 (FG′ ) = 0.
    The intuition is clear in case α1 is h1 or htwist
                                                1     or the maximum excess, and
F = F: passing to a subgraph cannot increase the first Betti number or the reduced
cyclicity of a graph.
    One way in which a sheaf FG′ can naturally arise is when we take a short exact
sequence of sheaves in G,
                             0 → F1 → F2 → F3 → 0,
and take the tensor product with FG′ ; the tensor product preserves exactness (i.e.,
all higher Tor groups vanish in sheaves of vector spaces over graphs), so we get a
new short exact sequence
                   0 → F1 ⊗ FG′ → F2 ⊗ FG′ → F3 ⊗ FG′ → 0;
now note that for any sheaf, F , on G we have
                                  F ⊗ FG′ = FG′ .
                         1.4. SHEAF THEORY AND HOMOLOGY                             25


    As a consequence, if one has an exact sequence of sheaves on G,
                              0 → F1 → F2 → F3 → 0,
and one expects that m.e.(F2 ) ≤ m.e.(F3 ), then a simple homological explanation
for this inequality would be that m.e.(F1 ) = 0. But this would, in turn, imply that
m.e.((F2 )G′ ) ≤ m.e.((F3 )G′ ) for all open subsets, G′ , of G, which could be a much
stronger inequality (and is much stronger for the setting of the SHNC).
     Let us state a slightly stronger “contagious vanishing” theorem that we shall
apply to the maximum excess.
Definition 1.15. By a scaling first quasi-Betti number, α1 , we mean a rule that,
for some field, F, and any digraph, G, assigns a non-negative real number to each
sheaf of F-vector spaces over G, such that
      (1) α1 is a first quasi-Betti number when restricted to sheaves on G for any
          digraph, G;
      (2) for any covering map φ : K → G of digraphs and any sheaf, F , on G we
          have
                              α1 (φ∗ F ) = α1 (F ) deg(φ);
         and
     (3) for an étale φ : K → G and any sheaf, F , on K we have
                                  α1 (φ! F ) = α1 (F ).
     By the end of this chapter we will know that the maximum excess is a scaling
first quasi-Betti number: condition (2) follows from Theorem 1.27; conditions (1)
and (3) follow from Theorem 1.10 by taking limits; since condition (1) is almost
immediate, we prove only condition (3).
     For arbitrary φ : K → G, and arbitrary µ : G′ → G, let K ′ = G′ ×G K, and let
µ : K ′ → K and φ′ : K ′ → G′ be the projections. We easily see (on each vertex
  ′

and edge of G) a natural isomorphism
(1.21)                          (φ′ )! (µ′ )∗ F ≃ µ∗ φ! F .
Using equation (1.15) we have
                                                  
                   h1 (µ′ )∗ F = h1 (φ′ )! (µ′ )∗ F = h1 (µ∗ φ! F ).
Now we take µ : G′ → G to be a covering map; then µ′ : K ′ → K is a covering map
of the same degree as µ; since φ is étale, so is φ′ : K ′ → G′ , and hence the girth
of K ′ is at least that of G′ (since any closed, non-backtracking walk on K ′ pushes
down, via φ′ , to one on G′ of equal length). Hence if the girth of G′ is sufficiently
large we have
                                
          m.e.(F ) = h1 (µ′ )∗ F / deg(µ′ ) = h1 (µ∗ φ! F )/ deg(µ) = m.e.(φ! F ).
Theorem 1.16. Let α1 be a scaling first quasi-Betti number. If α1 (F ) = 0 for
a sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, and ν : G′ → G is étale, then α1 (FG′ ) = 0 where
FG′ = ν! ν ∗ F ≃ F ⊗ FG′ .
     Proof. Since ν is étale, it factors as an open inclusion j : G′ → G′′ followed
by a covering map µ : G′′ → G. Since α1 scales, we have α1 (F ) = 0 implies that
α1 (φ∗ F ). which implies α1 (F ′ ) = 0, where
                              F ′ = (µ∗ F )G′ = j! j ∗ µ∗ F
26                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


by Theorem 1.14. Hence
                               α1 (µ! F ′ ) = α1 (F ′ ) = 0.
But
                         µ! F ′ = µ! j! j ∗ µ∗ F ≃ ν! ν ∗ F = FG′ ,
so
                              α1 (FG′ ) = α1 (µ! F ′ ) = 0.
                                                                                      

    Note that if φ : K → G is not étale, then for a sheaf, F , on K, the maximum
excess of F and φ! F need not agree. For example, consider φ : B2 → B1 , the
unique morphism of digraphs, where Bi is the graph with one vertex and i self-
loops, and F = U, the unhappy 4-bundle of Subsection 1.2.4. Then m.e.(U) = 0
but m.e.(φ! U) = 1, as the head/tail neighbourhood of the span of β − γ is two
dimensional. Moreover, notice how our proof that m.e.(F ) = m.e.(φ! F ) for φ étale
would fail to work for arbitrary φ: for arbitrary φ, not necessarily étale, we would
not be able to assert that K ′ has large girth; in the example in this paragraph,
φ takes two edges to one, and as a result K ′ always has girth at most two (and
Abelian girth at most eight).
    We finish with a remark that may be useful when generalizing sheaves to dis-
crete structures beyond graphs. Equation (1.21) is known as a “base change”
morphism. In more general contexts, there is usually a natural “base change”
morphism
                               µ∗ φ! F → (φ′ )! (µ′ )∗ F
that is not generally injective or surjective, not even for presheaves of vector spaces
on finite categories; see [Fri05]. However if φ : K → G is any digraph morphism,
then φ determines a functor Φ : Cat(K) → Cat(G) of the associated categories, and
this functor is always “target liftable,” i.e., for any morphism, α, of Cat(G) and
object, P , in Cat(K) with Φ(P ) being the target of α, there is a morphism, α′ , for
Cat(K) whose target is P and with Φ(α′ ) = α. In [Fri05] we see that the “target
liftable” property for φ (or, more precisely, Φ) guarantees the isomorphism in the
base change morphism (actually [Fri05] speaks of the dual morphism µ∗ φ∗ F →
(φ′ )∗ (µ′ )∗ F and “source liftable” in the discussion after Theorem 10.2 there). So if
we, for example, spoke of graphs without requiring the edges to have both endpoints,
then the simple example of [Fri05] shows that equation (1.21) would fail. Of course,
if K is a subgraph obtained from G by deleting any number of edges, then the
inclusion φ (or, more precisely, associated Φ) is not source liftable. Hence “target
liftability” (and not “source liftability”) should guide us in generalizing sheaves
on graphs to more general discrete structures, if we wish to have similar theorems
about analogues of the maximum excess being invariant under φ! for étale φ.

                            1.5. Twisted Cohomology
     In this section we describe a number of aspects of twisted homology, and give
its relationship to the homology of pullbacks under Abelian covers. We show that
the first twisted Betti number of the structure sheaf of a graph, G, agrees with
ρ(G). We then prove a number of related results, such as giving a condition under
which the maximum excess agrees with the first Betti number.
                                1.5. TWISTED COHOMOLOGY                                 27


     1.5.1. Remarks on the Definition. Twists and twisted homology were de-
fined in Subsection 1.2.3. In this subsection we make a few remarks on the defini-
tions.
     In our definition of twists, for symmetry we could have also specified a multiplier
(like ψ(e)) for F ψ (h, e), not just F ψ (t, e); i.e., we could have defined a twists to be
a map EG × {t, h} → F′ . But there is no real need for a F ψ (h, e) multiplier, since
all twisted homology groups would be isomorphic.
     Note that htwist
                  i   (F ) could be alternatively described as the “generic dimension
of hi (F ψ );” more precisely, there is a polynomial, f , in {ψe } over F such that the
dimension of hi (F ψ ) for any fixed twist, ψ, with ψe ∈ F, is htwist
                                                                    i    (F ) provided that
f (ψ) 6= 0. Furthermore, for any particular ψ ∈ FEG , the dimension of hi (F ψ ) is
at least the generic dimension. All these facts follow from the fact that the rank
of a matrix is the size of the largest square submatrix whose determinant does not
vanish. This discussion assumes either that F is infinite or that F is considered
as embedded in an infinite or sufficiently large extension field of itself (it is not
clear how to give an interesting meaning to “generic” when dealing with finite
dimensional spaces over finite fields). Of course, the advantange of our original
definition, which involves F(ψ) with the ψ being indeterminates, is that it gives a
simple, usable definition for arbitrary F, even when F is finite.

    1.5.2. Twists and Abelian Coverings. We now wish to describe twisting
as giving the homology of pullbacks under Abelian coverings. Given an Abelian
group, A, say that a field, F, is a Fourier field for A if F contains n = |A| distinct
n-th roots of 1 (which holds, for example, when the characteristic of F is relatively
prime to n and F is algebraically closed). In this case, if A, acts on a vector space,
S, over a field, F, then we have a canonical isomorphism
                                     M
                                         S ν ≃ S,
                                          ν

where ν : A → F ranges over all characters on A and
                       S ν = {s ∈ S | as = ν(a)s for all a ∈ A};
indeed, for each ν we have S ν ⊂ S, and these inclusions give a map from the direct
sum of the S ν to S; the inverse map, from S to the direct sum of the S ν , is given
as the sum of the maps from S to any particular S ν via
                                       X
(1.22)                      s 7→ (1/n)     ν −1 (α)(αs);
                                              α∈A
                       −1
the values 1/n and ν        (α) all lie in F for any F that is a Galois field for A.
Lemma 1.17. Let φ : G′ → G be an Abelian covering map with Galois group A.
Let F be a sheaf of F-vector spaces on G such that F is Fourier field for A. Then
                                        M            ν
(1.23)                     Hi (φ∗ F ) ≃    Hi (φ∗ F ) ,
                                               ψ

the sum is over all characters, ν, of A. Let ~a = {ae }e∈EG be any Galois coordinates
for φ : G′ → G, and for any character, ν, of A, let ν(~a) denote the F-twist taking
e ∈ EG to ν(ae ). Then for each ν we have
                                         ν             
                               Hi (φ∗ F ) ≃ Hi F ν(~a) .
28                         1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


     Proof. We have an A action on (φ∗ F )(EG′ ) via
                                                    (af )(e) = f (ea)
for all a ∈ A, f ∈ (φ∗ F )(EG′ ), and e ∈ EG′ . Similarly (af )(v) = f (va) defines an
A action on (φ∗ F )(VG′ ). The map in equation (1.22) gives isomorphisms
                        M              ν                 M               ν
           (φ∗ F )(E) →     (φ∗ F )(E) , (φ∗ F )(V ) →         (φ∗ F )(V ) ,
                                 ν                                                        ν

and dφ∗ F intertwines with these maps, which establishes equation (1.23). It remains
to identify                                   ν
                                    Hi (φ∗ F )
with Hi of the appropriately twisted F . So choose Galois coordinates, {ae }, and
therefore identify VG′ with VG × A and EG′ with EG × A so that
                         h(e, a) = (he, ae a) and t(e, a) = (te, a)
(as in Subsection 1.3.2). Given an f ∈ (φ∗ F )(E), define fe ∈ F (E) via
                                                   fe(e) = f (e, idA ),
where idA is the identity of A and we identify EG′ with EG × A as above. Similarly
define a linear map f 7→ fe from (φ∗ F )(V ) to F (V ). Now consider
                                                 ν
                                 f ∈ H1 (φ∗ F ) .
For all v ′ ∈ VG′ we have
                                       X                                X
                                                     f (e′ ) =                        f (e′ ).
                             e′      s.t. te′ =v ′               e′   s.t. he′ =v ′

Taking v ′ = (v, idA ) yields
                 X                  X             X
                      f (e, idA ) =   f (e, a−1
                                             e )=   (a−1
                                                      e f )(e, idA ),
                  te=v                           he=v                      he=v
                             ∗            ν
which, since f ∈ (H1 (φ F )) ,
                                                  X
                                              =          ν(ae−1 )f (e, idA ).
                                                  he=v
It follows that                           X                     X
                                                  fe(e) =           ν(a−1 e
                                                                       e )f (e).
                                          te=v              he=v

In other words, if we set f (e) = ν(a−1
                                      ′ e
                                     e )f (e), then we have
                                          X                            X
                                                  ν(ae )f ′ (e) =            f ′ (e).
                                          te=v                        he=v
        ′
Hence f ∈ H1 (F     ν(~
                      a)
                           ). Clearly given f we can reconstruct fe and then f , namely
                                                            ′

                                              f (e, a) = ν(ae )ν(a)f ′ (e).
Hence f 7→ f ′ is an isomorphism
                                                       ν
                                          (φ∗ F )(EG′ ) → F ν(~a) (EG ).
Furthermore we have an analogous map f 7→ fe
                                      ν
                         (φ∗ F )(VG′ ) → F ν(~a) (VG ),
                             1.5. TWISTED COHOMOLOGY                               29


namely, fe(v) = f (v, idA ), which likewise is an isomorphism. Hence we get a com-
mutative diagram:
                                       ν f 7→ f ′ ν(~a)
                          (φ∗ F )(EG′ )        ✲ F       (EG )

                          dφ∗ F                           dF ν(~a)
                                                      ❄
                                              fe ν(~a)
                                ❄ 
                                       ν f 7→ ✲
                         (φ∗ F )(VG′ )          F      (VG )
Since the horizontal arrows are isomorphisms, this diagram sets up isomorphisms
between the kernel and cokernel of the vertical arrows. Hence for i = 0, 1 we have
                                       ν
                             Hi (φ∗ F ) ≃ Hi (F ν(~a) )

                                                                                   

     Lemma 1.17 shows that if F is any infinite field, F is any sheaf on a digraph,
G, and we take a random Z/pZ cover µ : G′ → G, then we have that hi (µ∗ F )/p
tends to htwist
           i    (F ) in probability as p → ∞.
     Lemma 1.17 also shows that if µ : G′ → G is an Abelian cover with covering
group A, then Hi (µ∗ F ) is the sum of |A| groups, each isomorphic to an Hi (F ψ )
for a particular value of ψ, and hence of dimension at least htwist
                                                              i     (F ). We conclude
the following lemma.

Lemma 1.18. If µ : G′ → G is any Abelian cover of G, and F is any sheaf on G,
then
                            hi (µ∗ F ) ≥ deg(µ)htwist
                                                i     (F ).

    This can be viewed as an upper bound for htwist
                                              i     (F ). Now we note the trivial
lower bound
                                  htwist
                                   1     (F ) ≥ −χ(F ),
since htwist
       1     (F ) is the kernel of a matrix whose dimension of domain minus that of
codomain is −χ(F ).
    If G is any connected digraph, then for any prime, p, we claim that G has
an Abelian cover of degree p that is connected; indeed, just take the monodromy
map to map any generator of π1 (G) to 1 ∈ Z/pZ and use the remark at the end of
Subsection 1.3.3. In this case we have h1 (G′ ) = 1 − χ(G′ ) = 1 − pχ(G) = pρ(G) + 1.
But by Lemma 1.18 with F = F (so that µ∗ F = F on G′ ) we have

                htwist
                 1     (F) ≤ h1 (G′ , F)/p = h1 (G′ )/p = ρ(G) + (1/p).

Letting p → ∞ we conclude htwist
                           1     (F) ≤ ρ(G). But the “trivial lower bound” gives

                             htwist
                              1     (F) ≥ −χ(F) = ρ(G).

If G is not connected then we apply the above to each of its connected components
and conclude the following theorem.

Theorem 1.19. For any digraph, G, we have ρ(G) = htwist
                                                  1     (F).
30                      1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


    1.5.3. The Maximum Excess Bound. Let F be a sheaf of F-vector spaces
on a digraph, G, and let U ⊂ F (V ). Let ψ = {ψ(e)}e∈EG be a twist of indetermi-
nates. Then d = dF ψ : F (E) → F (V ) can be restricted as a morphism
                                 Γht (U ) ⊗F F′ → U ⊗F F′ .
By the “trivial bound,” the kernel of this morphism has dimension at least
                                 
                     dim Γht (U ) − dim(U ) = excess(F , U ).
Hence the kernel of d has at least this dimension. This gives the following simple
bound.
Lemma 1.20. For any sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, we have
                                    htwist
                                     1     (F ) ≥ m.e.(F ).
    We wish to show that this holds with equality in certain cases; Theorem 1.10
says that equality will hold if F is pulled back appropriately.
Definition 1.21. If F is a sheaf on a digraph, G, we say that F is edge simple if
F (e) is of dimension 0 or 1 for each e ∈ EG .
Theorem 1.22. Let F be an infinite field. Let F be an edge simple sheaf of F-vector
spaces on a digraph, G. Then
                                    htwist
                                     1     (F ) = m.e.(F ).
    Proof. Let {e1 , . . . , er } ⊂ E be the edges where F (e) 6= 0. Let ψ = {ψi }i=1,...,r
be indeterminates, and let
                                                 
                              F (V )(ψ) = F (V ) ⊗F F(ψ).
For each ei choose a wi ∈ F (ei ) with wi 6= 0, and let
     vi = ai + ψi bi ∈ F (V )(ψ),      with      ai = F (h, ei )(wi ),   bi = F (t, ei )(wi ).
Say that a vj is critical for v1 , . . . , vr if the span of {vi }i6=j is of dimension one less
than {vi }i=1,...,r . Let us first prove the lemma assuming that no vector is critical.
Let r′ be the dimension of the span of the vi , so htwist     1     (F ) = r − r′ . In view of
Lemma 1.20, suffices to show that
                                      m.e.(F ) ≥ r − r′ .
If r − r′ = 0 there is nothing to prove. So we may assume r′ < r.
     We wish to show that there exists a U ⊂ F (V ) such that
                           |{i | ai , bi ∈ U }| ≥ dim(U ) + r − r′ .
Let us first assume that for any I with {vi }i∈I independent (over F(ψ)) we also
have that {ai }i∈I are independent (over F).
    By reordering the vi , we may assume that
                                         v1 , v2 , . . . vr′
are linearly independent. Let A be the span of a1 , . . . , ar′ . Consider that
(1.24)                (a1 + ψ1 b1 ) ∧ · · · ∧ (ar′ +1 + ψr′ +1 br′ +1 ) = 0.
Considering the constant coefficient (i.e., with no ψi ’s) of this wedge product, we
have a1 ∧ · · · ∧ ar′ +1 = 0, and therefore ar′ +1 ∈ A; similarly considering the ψr′ +1
                                1.5. TWISTED COHOMOLOGY                                      31


coefficient shows that br′ +1 ∈ A. Replacing vr′ +1 with any vs with s > r′ + 1 shows
that
                              br′ +1 , . . . , br , a1 , . . . , ar ∈ A.
     In other words, we have shown that if U is the span of the a1 , . . . , ar , we have
that U is r′ dimensional and contains any bj such that j lies outside a set, I, such
that |I| = r′ and {vi }i∈I are independent. But no vector, vi , is critical for {vi };
hence for any j there is an I of size r′ such that j lies outside I and {vi }i∈I are
independent. Hence bj ∈ U for any j = 1, . . . , r. Hence excess(F , U ) ≥ r − r′ . This
establishes the lemma when no vector, vi , is critical, and when for all I, {vi }i∈I are
independent implies that {ai }i∈I are as well.
     Now let us establish the lemma assuming no vector, vi , is critical but without
assuming {vi }i∈I independent implies {ai }i∈I is independent. Note that since F is
infinite, any generic set in Fn (i.e., complement of the set of zeros of a polynomial)
is nonempty. For each I for which {vi }i∈I is independent, we have
                    ^
                       (ai + ψi bi ) 6= 0 (in Λ|I| (F (V ) ⊗F F(ψ)) ).
                        i∈I

So for a generic set, GI , of θ ∈ Fr we have
                                   ^
                                     (ai + θi bi ) 6= 0.
                                     i∈I
                    r
So choose a θ ∈ F in the intersection of all GI for all I with {vi }i∈I independent.
Let ψe = ψ + θ (where θ ∈ Fr and ψ is a collection of r indeterminates), and let

                                vei = ai + ψei bi = e
                                                    ai + ψi bi ,
where e ai = ai + θbi . We have {vi }i∈I is independent precisely when {e       vi }i∈I is,
since they differ by a parameter translation, but whenever this holds we also have
that the {e ai }i∈I are independent. But we have already proven the lemma in this
                              ai + ψi bi , since each independent subset of {e
case, i.e., the case of vei = e                                              vi } has the
corresponding subset of {e   ai } being independent. Hence we can apply the lemma to
conclude that there is a subspace U of F (V ) of dimension r′ , namely the span of
the e
    ai , such that
                                  e            ar , b1 , . . . , br ∈ U.
                                  a1 , . . . , e
But ai is an F-linear combination of e                        ai , bi ∈ U also implies ai ∈ U .
                                               ai and bi , so e
Hence, again, excess(F , U ) ≥ r − r′ .
     Let us finish by proving the lemma in general, i.e., without the assumption that
each vi is critical. Again, let r′ be the dimension of the span of v1 , . . . , vr as above.
If some element of v1 , . . . , vr is critical, we may assume it is v1 ; in this case, if some
element of v2 , . . . , vr is critical for that set, we may assume it is v2 ; continuing in
this fashion, there is an s such that for all i < s, vi is critical for vi , . . . , vr , and
no element of vs , . . . , vr is critical for that set. Consider the sheaf F ′ which agrees
with F everywhere except that F ′ (ei ) = 0 for i < s (and so F and F ′ agree at all
vertices and all ei with i ≥ s). Then {vs , . . . , vr } is of size r − s + 1, but also the
span of {vs , . . . , vr } is of size r′ − s + 1 (by the criticality of the vi with i < s), and
hence htwist
        1    (F ′ ) = r − r′ . But since no element of vs , . . . , vr is critical for that set,
the lemma holds for the case of F ′ (as shown by the end of the previous paragraph).
We therefore construct a U such that excess(F ′ , U ) ≥ r − r′ . Since F ′ (V ) ⊂ F (V ),
32                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


we can view U ⊂ F (V ) and it is clear that Γht (U ) in F ′ is a subset of Γht (U ) in F .
Hence
                     excess(F , U ) ≥ excess(F ′ , U ) = r − r′ .
                                                                                        

                 1.6. Maximum Excess and Supermodularity
    In this section we prove that pulling back a sheaf via φ multiplies the maxi-
mum excess by deg(φ). To prove this we will prove supermodularity of the excess
function, which has a number of important consequences. Before discussing this,
we develop some terminology and simple observations about what we call “com-
partmentalized subspaces;” this development will be used in this section and in
Section 1.8. We finish this section with some additional remarks about the maxi-
mum excess.

    1.6.1. Compartmentalized Subspaces. In this subsection we mention a
few important definitions, and some simple theorems we will use regarding these
definitions.
Definition 1.23. Let W be a finite dimensional vector space over a field, F. By
a decomposition of W we mean an isomorphism a direct sum of vector spaces with
W , i.e.,
                                  M
                              π:     Ws → W.
                                       s∈S
For any s ∈ S and any v ∈ Ws , let the extension of v of index s by zero, denoted
extend(v, s), to be the element of ⊕s∈S Ws that is v on Ws and zero on Wq with
q 6= s. For s ∈ S and a subspace W ′ ⊂ W , let the portion of W ′ supported in s be
                                    n                              o
              supportedIn(s, W ′ ) = v ∈ Ws | π extend(v, s) ∈ W ′ ,

and let the compartmentalization of W ′ be
                                                                  !
                                       M
                         ′                                    ′
                      (W )comp = π           supportedIn(s, W ) ,
                                       s∈S

which is a subspace of W ′ . We say that a subspace W ′ is compartmentalized if
(W ′ )comp = W ′ . We say that w1 , . . . , wm ∈ W are compartmentally distinct if for
any s ∈ S there is at most one j between 1 and m for which the Ws component of
wj is non-zero.
    So W ′ ⊂ W as above is compartmentalized iff W ′ is the image under π of a set
of the form                        M
                                      Ws′ .
                                        s∈S
    The intuitive point of the definition of compartmentalized subspaces is that
certain constructions, such as maximum excess, are performed over the direct sum-
mands of a vector space; in some such constructions, the compartmentalized sub-
spaces are the subspaces of key interest.
    In this section we will use only these definitions. In Section 1.8, we use two
simple observations about the situation of Definition 1.23. First, if w1 , . . . , wm are
compartmentally distinct, then w1 , . . . , wm are linearly independent if (and only
                   1.6. MAXIMUM EXCESS AND SUPERMODULARITY                           33


if) they are each non-zero. Second, W ′ ⊂ W is compartmentalized only if (and if)
there exist quotients, Qs , of Ws for s ∈ S such that π induces an isomorphism
                                  M
(1.25)                                Qs → W/W ′ .
                                  s∈S
It will be helpful to formally combine these two observations into a theorem that
follows immediately; we will use this theorem repeatedly in Section 1.8, in our proof
of Theorem 1.10.
Theorem 1.24. Let W be a finite dimensional vector space with a decomposi-
tion. Let w1 , . . . , wm be compartmentally distinct, and let W ′ ⊂ W be a compart-
mentalized subspace of W . Then the images of w1 , . . . , wm in W/W ′ are linearly
independent (in W/W ′ ) iff they are nonzero (in W/W ′ ).
      Compartmentalization is a key to our definition of maximum excess. Indeed,
for a sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, both F (V ) and F (E) are defined as direct sums,
and hence come with natural decompositions. The head/tail neighbourhood is a
compartmentalized space by its definition in equation (1.3); this is crucial to the
resulting definition of excess and maximum excess, in Definition 1.7. Note that
dh , dt (but not d in general) are “compartmentalized morphisms” in that they take
vectors supported in one component of F (E) to those supported in one component
of F (V ). This means that with our definition of head/tail neighbourhood, for any
U ⊂ F (V ) and any twist, ψ, on G, the twisted differential, dF ψ takes Γht (U )⊗F F(ψ)
to U ⊗F F(ψ).
    1.6.2. Supermodularity and Its Consequences. First we make some sim-
ple remarks on the maximum excess. For any sheaf, F , we have
                   excess(F , 0) = 0,   excess(F , F (V )) = −χ(F ),
and hence                                       
                        m.e.(F ) ≥ max 0, −χ(F ) .
   We now show that if U achieves the maximum excess of F , then U must be
compartmentalized.
Theorem 1.25. Let the maximum excess of a sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, be
achieved on a space U ⊂ F (V ). Then U is compartmentalized with respect to
the identification π given by
                                 M
                              π:   F (v) → F (V ).
                                   v∈VG

    Proof. For e ∈ EG and w ∈ F (e), if we have dt w ∈ U , then
                                               
                   dt w = π extend F (t, e)w, te ∈ Ucomp;
similarly if dh w ∈ U , then dh w ∈ Ucomp . Hence, in view of equation (1.3), we have
                                Γht (Ucomp ) = Γht (U ).
Hence, if Ucomp is a proper subspace of U , then
                          excess(F , Ucomp) < excess(F , U ).
So if U maximizes the excess, then Ucomp = U ; i.e., U is compartmentalized.         
    The main results in this section stem from the following easy theorem.
34                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


Theorem 1.26. Let F be a sheaf on a graph, G. Then the excess, as a function
of U ⊂ F (V ), is supermodular, i.e.,
(1.26)        excess(U1 ) + excess(U2 ) ≤ excess(U1 ∩ U2 ) + excess(U1 + U2 )
for all U1 , U2 ⊂ F (V ). It follows that the maximizers of the excess function of F ,
              maximizers(F ) = {U ⊂ F (V ) | excess(U ) = m.e.(F )},
is a sublattice of the set of subsets of F (V ), i.e., is closed under intersection and
sum (and therefore has a unique maximal element and a unique minimal element).
Finally, if U1 , U2 are maximizers of the excess function of F , then
                         Γht (U1 + U2 ) = Γht (U1 ) + Γht (U2 ).
    Proof. We use the fact that if A1 , A2 are any subspaces of an F-vector space,
then
                dim(A1 ) + dim(A2 ) = dim(A1 ∩ A2 ) + dim(A1 + A2 ).
In particular, for U1 , U2 ⊂ F (V ) we have
(1.27)         dim(U1 ) + dim(U2 ) = dim(U1 ∩ U2 ) + dim(U1 + U2 ).
On the other hand
                         Γht (U1 ∩ U2 ) = Γht (U1 ) ∩ Γht (U2 )
and
(1.28)                   Γht (U1 + U2 ) ⊃ Γht (U1 ) + Γht (U2 );
hence
                                                                           
(1.29) dim Γht (U1 ) + dim Γht (U2 ) ≤ dim Γht (U1 ∩ U2 ) + dim Γht (U1 + U2 ) .
Combining equations (1.27) and (1.29) yields equation (1.26). It follows that if U1
and U2 are maximizers of the excess function of F , then so are U1 ∩ U2 and U1 + U2 ,
and equations (1.29) and hence (1.28) must hold with equality.                    
    The supermodularity has a number of important consequences. We list two
such theorem below.
Theorem 1.27. Let φ : G′ → G be a covering map of graphs, and let F be a sheaf
on G. Then
(1.30)                      m.e.(φ∗ F ) = deg(φ) m.e.(F ).
Furthermore, if the maximum excess of F is achieved at U ⊂ F (VG ), then the
maximum excess of φ∗ F is achieved at φ−1 (U ).
   Proof. Our proof uses Theorem 1.26 and Galois theory. Let F ′ = φ∗ F . If
T ⊂ F (V ) is compartmentalized, T = ⊕v∈VG Tv , let
                                   M
                       φ−1 (T ) =      Tφ(v′ ) ⊂ F ′ (VG′ ).
                                     v ′ ∈VG′

Since φ is a covering map, the number of preimages of any element of VG ∐ EG is
deg(φ), and hence
                                          
(1.31)               excess F ′ , φ−1 (T ) = deg(φ) excess(F , T ).
Taking T to maximize the excess of F we get
(1.32)                       m.e.(F ′ ) ≥ deg(φ) m.e.(F ).
                     1.6. MAXIMUM EXCESS AND SUPERMODULARITY                       35


It remains to prove the reverse inequality in order to establish equation (1.30);
note that if we do so, then the second statement of the theorem follows from equa-
tion (1.31).
     First let us assume that φ is Galois, with Galois group Gal(φ). Each g ∈ Gal(φ)
is a morphism g : K → K. Let F ′ = φ∗ F . There is a natural map ιg : g ∗ F ′ → F ′ ,
since for every P ∈ VG′ ∐ EG′ we have F ′ (P ) = F ′ (P g) (note that this really
is equality of vector spaces; they both equal F (φ(P )), by definition). So ιg gives
automorphism on F ′ (EG′ ) and F ′ (VG′ ). For any U ⊂ (φ∗ F )(V ), any element of
Gal(φ) preserves dim(U ) and dim(Γht (U )), and hence the excess. It follows that
for all g ∈ Gal(φ), ιg takes maximizers(φ∗ F ) to itself. Hence if W is the unique
maximal element of the maximizers, then W is invariant under ιg for all g ∈ Gal(φ);
this means that if W = ⊕v′ ∈V (G′ ) Wv′ and
                                                       
                                    M        X
                             f=
                             W                    Wv′  ,
                                      v∈VG   v ′ ∈φ−1 (v)

                                                     f ). Hence
then (Wv′ = Wv′′ if φ(v ′ ) = φ(v ′′ ) and) W = φ−1 (W
                  m.e.(F ′ ) =     excess(W )
                            =                      f ) ≤ deg(φ) m.e.(F ).
                                   deg(φ) excessF (W
In summary,
                                 m.e.(F ′ ) ≤ deg(φ) m.e.(F ).
From equation (1.32), it follows that the above inequality holds with equality.
     It remains to prove the equality when φ : G′ → G is not Galois. By the Normal
Extension Theorem of Galois graph theory (i.e., Theorem 1.11), there exists a
ν : L → G′ be such that φν (and hence ν) is Galois. Since φν is Galois, we have
                           m.e.(ν ∗ φ∗ F ) = deg(φν) m.e.(F ),
and since ν is Galois we have
                          m.e.(ν ∗ (φ∗ F )) = deg(ν) m.e.(φ∗ F ).
It follows that
                             m.e.(φ∗ F ) = deg(φ) m.e.(F ).
                                                                                   
    1.6.3. Additional Remarks on the Maximum Excess. Here we make
some additional remarks on the maximum excess, either for later use or to provide
some more intuition about it.
    We mention that m.e.(F ) + χ(F ) can be viewed as a generalization of the
“number of acyclic components” of a graph; for example, for the sheaf F on G we
have
               m.e.(F) + χ(F) = ρ(G) + |VG | − |EG | = hacyclic
                                                        0       (G)
equals the number of “acyclic components” of G, i.e. the number of connected
components of G that have no cycles, i.e., that are isolated vertices or trees. A
similar remark holds for F replaced by FK and G replaced by K, for any map
K → G.
    We shall make use of the following alternate interpretation of the maximum
excess.
36                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


Theorem 1.28. For any sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, the maximum excess of F is
the same as
                               max
                                ′
                                    −χ(F ′ ),
                                    F ⊂F
i.e., the maximum value of minus the Euler characteristic over all subsheaves, F ′ ,
of F .
    Proof. Each compartmentalized U ⊂ F (V ) along with Γht (U ) determines a
subsheaf F ′ whose Euler characteristic is minus the excess of U . Conversely, for
any subsheaf F ′ ⊂ F we have U = F ′ (V ) satisfies
                     dim(F ′ ) = dim(U ),      F ′ (E) ⊂ Γht (H).
Hence the excess of U is at least minus the Euler characteristic of F ′ .            

     The above theorem has a simple graph theoretic analogue, namely that
                                ρ(G) = max −χ(H).
                                        H⊂G

One can easily prove this directly (with ρ(G) = −χ(H) when H consists of all cyclic
connected components of G) or use Theorem 1.28.
     We remark that it is easy to give a direct proof that the maximum excess
satisfies some of the properties of a first quasi-Betti number. For example, it is
immediate that for sheaves F1 , F2 on a graph, G, we have
                       m.e.(F1 ⊕ F2 ) = m.e.(F1 ) + m.e.(F2 ).
As another example, if F1 → F2 is an injection, then Theorem 1.28 shows that
                                m.e.(F1 ) ≤ m.e.(F2 ).
It is quite conceivable that all of the “first quasi-Betti number” properties of the
maximum excess have simple, direct proofs that avoid using Theorem 1.10. How-
ever, we find that Theorem 1.10, that implies that the maximum excess is a limiting
twisted Betti number, is extremely useful in providing intuition about the maximum
excess.

               1.7. htwist
                     1     and the Universal Abelian Covering
     For a digraph, G, we will study its maximum Abelian covering, π : G[Z] → G,
which is an infinite graph, and show that for a sheaf F , on G, we have H1twist (F ) is
non-zero iff there is a non-zero element of H1 (π ∗ F ) that is of finite support. This
is crucial to our proof of Theorem 1.10. We shall illustrate these theorems on the
unhappy 4-bundle, which gives great insight into our proof of Theorem 1.10 that
we give in Section 1.8.
     Let Z be the set of integers, and let Z≥0 be the set of non-negative integers.
For a set, S, we use ZS to denote the set of functions from S to Z. We define the
rank of an n ∈ ZS to be                     X
                                 rank(n) =      n(s)
                                            s∈S
(in this paper S will always be finite, so the summation makes sense).
     Given a digraph, G, let G[Z] be the infinite digraph with
                     VG[Z] = VG × ZEG ,     EG[Z] = EG × ZEG ,
                 1.7. htwist
                       1     AND THE UNIVERSAL ABELIAN COVERING                       37


with heads and tails maps given for each e ∈ EG and n ∈ ZEG by
                 hG[Z] (e, n) = (hG e, n),   tG[Z] (e, n) = (tG e, n + δe ),
where δe ∈ ZEG is 1 at e and 0 elsewhere. Projection onto the first component
gives an infinite degree covering map π : G[Z] → G. For a vertex, (v, n), or an edge,
(e, n), of G[Z], we define its rank to be the rank of n.
Definition 1.29. For a digraph, G, we define the universal Abelian covering of G
to be π : G[Z] → G described in the previous paragraph.
     It is not important to us, but easy to verify, that π factors uniquely through any
connected Abelian covering of G. Abelian coverings have been studied in numerous
works, including [FT05, FMT06].
     We similarly define G[Z≥0 ], with Z≥0 replacing Z everywhere; G[Z≥0 ] can be
viewed as a subgraph of G[Z].
     Our approach to Theorem 1.10 involves the properties of the graphs G[Z≥0 ], so
let us consider some examples. If Bd denotes the bouquet of d self-loops, i.e., the
digraph with one vertex and d edges, then Bd [Z≥0 ] is just the usual d-dimensional
non-negative integer lattice, depicted in Figures 1 and 2. If G′ → G is a covering



                          (v,0,2)


                                              (v,1,1)      (v,2,1)
                          (v,0,1)




                                 (v,0,0)     (v,1,0)    (v,2,0)

                                    Figure 1. B2 [Z≥0 ].


map of degree d, then G′ [Z] → G[Z] and G′ [Z≥0 ] → G[Z≥0 ] are both covering maps.
However, for d > 1 and |EG | ≥ 1, we have |EG′ | > |EG |, and the covering will be
of infinite degree.
     Now consider G′ [Z≥0 ], where φ : G′ → B2 is the degree two cover of B2 dis-
cussed with the unhappy 4-bundle in Subsection 1.2.4 (just beneath equation (1.9)).
As we see, and illustrated in Figure 3, G′ [Z≥0 ] has no cycle of length four. As we
shall see, the fact that htwist
                            1   (U) = 1 is a result, in a sense, of the cycles of length
four in B2 [Z≥0 ]; the fact that these cycles “open up” to non-closed walks in G′ [Z≥0 ]
is partly why htwist
                 1    (φ∗ U) = 0.
     Now we define homology groups on graphs of the form G[Z] and G[Z≥0 ], and,
more generally, any infinite graph. If K is a infinite graph that is locally finite
(i.e., each vertex is incident upon a finite number of edges), we can still define a
sheaf (of finite dimensional vector spaces over a field, F) just as before. Hence a
sheaf, F , on K as a collection of a finite dimensional F-vector space, F (P ) for each
P ∈ VK ∐ EK , along with restriction maps F (h, e) and F (t, e) for each e ∈ EK .
  38                            1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS



                                                         (v, 0, 0)




                                                               ✛
                                                        ✲
                                     (v, 1, 0)                              (v, 1, 0)




                                              ✛




                                                                                   ✛
                                    ✲




                                                                           ✲
                    (v, 2, 0)                            (v, 1, 1)                                (v, 0, 2)

             Figure 2. First part of B2 [Z≥0 ]. Notice the cycle of length four.


                                                        (v1 , 0, 0, 0,
                                                                    ✛0)
                                                          ✲




                      (v1 , 1, 0, ✛
                                  0, 0)                                                   (v1 , 0, 0, ✛
                                                                                                      1, 0)
                         ✲                                                                   ✲




(v1 , 2, 0, 0, 0)                         (v1 , 1, 0, 1, 0)          (v1 , 0, 1, 1, 0)                        (v1 , 0, 0, 2, 0)

             Figure 3. First part of G′ [Z≥0 ] near (v, ~0). No cycles of length
             four. The four (Z≥0 )EG′ coordinates are, in order, e11 , e21 , e12 , e22
             where eji lies over ei ∈ EB2 and are described in the last equations
             of Subsection 1.2.4 that give the νij .


  We shall define
                                          M                                      Y
                         F ⊕ (V ) =            F (v),    and F Π (V ) =                  F (v),
                                        v∈VG                                    v∈VG

  which generally differ, F ⊕ (V ) being the subset of F Π (V ) of elements {fv }v∈VG that
  are supported (i.e., nonzero) on only finitely many v. Similarly we define F ⊕ (E)
  and F Π (E). Then d = dh − dt can be viewed as a map F Π (E) → F Π (V ) or,
  respectively, F ⊕ (E) → F ⊕ (V ), and their cokernels and kernels are respectively
  denoted HiΠ (F ) and Hi⊕ (F ) for i = 0, 1.
       If F is a sheaf on G, and π : G[Z] → G the universal Abelian covering, then
  π ∗ F is a sheaf on G[Z].
       The following simple but important observation explains our interest in the
  universal Abelian covering.
                   1.7. htwist
                         1     AND THE UNIVERSAL ABELIAN COVERING                          39


Lemma 1.30. Let F be a sheaf on G, and π : G[Z] → G the universal Abelian
covering. Then H1twist (F ) is non-trivial iff H1⊕ (π ∗ F ) is non-trivial. If so, there is
a non-zero w ∈ H1⊕ (π ∗ F ) that is supported on G[Z≥0 ].
      Proof. For each e ∈ EG , let F (e) be of dimension de and have basis fe,1 , . . . , fe,de .
Let
                 ae,i = F (h, e)fe,i ∈ F (he),         be,i = F (t, e)fe,i ∈ F (te).
We have htwist
         1     (µ∗ F ) ≥ 1 iff the vectors
                                         ae,i + ψ(e)be,i
are linear dependent over F(ψ), where ψ is a collection of indeterminates indexed
on EG . This holds iff there are rational functions ce,i ∈ F(ψ) for each e ∈ EG and
i = 1, . . . , de such that
                              de
                            X X
(1.33)                                 ce,i (ψ)(ae,i + ψ(e)be,i ) = 0,
                           e∈EG i=1

where not all ce,i are zero. We may multiply the denominators of the ce,i (ψ) to
assume that they are polynomials, not all zero. We may write
                                       X
                            ce,i (ψ) =        ce,i,n ψ n ,
                                             n∈(Z≥0 )EG

where ce,i,n ∈ F and
                                              Y
                                      ψn =          ψ n(e) (e).
                                             e∈EG

      In summary, we see that htwist
                               1     (F ) 6= 0 iff there exist ce,i,n ∈ F, with ce,i,n = 0
for all but finitely many n, such that
                          X      X
(1.34)                               ψ n ce,i,n (ae,i + ψe be,i ) = 0
                         n∈(Z≥0 )EG    e,i

and not all the ce,i,n = 0. But equation (1.34) is equivalent to saying that
                                                 de
                                                 X
                                      w(e,n) =         ce,i,n fe,i
                                                 i=1

is a non-zero element of H1⊕ (π ∗ F ). Hence htwist
                                              1     (F ) 6= 0 iff H1⊕ (π ∗ F ) 6= 0.
                                                                                           

    The following is a simple graph theoretic definition that is crucial to our proof
of Lemma 1.32.
Definition 1.31. The Abelian girth of a digraph graph, G, is the girth of G[Z].
    Since G[Z] → G is a covering map, the girth of G[Z], which is the Abelian girth
of G, is at least the girth of G. Note also that B1 , the digraph with one vertex
and one edge (a self-loop), has girth one but infinite Abelian girth, i.e., G[Z] is a
two-sided infinite path and has no cycles. Similarly B2 , the digraph with one vertex
and two edges, has girth one but Abelian girth four.
40                     1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


                            1.8. Proof of Theorem 1.10
    We begin with the following lemma that is one of the (if not the) technical core
of this chapter.
Lemma 1.32. Let F be a sheaf on a digraph, G. Let µ : G′ → G be a covering
map such that G′ is of Abelian girth greater than
                                                
                         2 dim F (V ) + dim F (E) .

Then htwist
      1     (µ∗ F ) > 0 implies that m.e.(F ) > 0.
    In Subsection 1.8.7, the last subsection of this section, we use this lemma to
prove Theorem 1.10. The rest of the subsections of this section will be devoted to
proving the lemma; our proof, whose basic idea is fairly simple, requires a lot of
new notation and definitions.
     1.8.1. Outline of the Proof of Lemma 1.32. Consider the hypotheses of
Lemma 1.32. Let π : G′ [Z] → G′ be the universal Abelian cover of G′ , and let
F ′ = µ∗ F . We assume htwist 1   (F ′ ) ≥ 1, and we wish to prove that m.e.(F ) ≥ 1.
According to Lemma 1.30, there exists a nonzero w ∈ H1⊕ (π ∗ F ′ ) supported in
G′ [Z≥0 ]; fix such a w.
     Let us introduce some notation to explain the idea behind the proof. For
e ∈ EG , we may identify F (e) with the subspace of F (E) supported in e, i.e.,
consisting of vectors whose F (e′ ) component vanishes for e′ 6= e (this subspace
is the image of F (e) under u 7→ extend(u, e)). If f ∈ EG′ [Z] , then we let wf be
the f -component of w (as done in the proof of Lemma 1.30), so wf ∈ (π ∗ F ′ )(f );
but (π ∗ F ′ )(f ) equals F (µπf ), and can therefore be identified with the subset of
F (E) supported in µπf ; let wf be the element of F (E) corresponding to wf . For
F ⊂ EG′ [Z] , set
                           C(F ) = span{wf | f ∈ F } ⊂ F (E),
                   A(F ) = span{dF ,h wf | f ∈ F } = dF ,h C(F ) ⊂ F (V ),
and
                   B(F ) = span{dF ,t wf | f ∈ F } = dF ,t C(F ) ⊂ F (V ).
Our idea is to construct an increasing sequence of subgraphs, U1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Ur = U ,
of G[Z≥0 ], and set Fi = EUi , so that F = Fr satisfies
                                                            
(1.35)                    dim A(F ) + B(F ) ≤ dim C(F ) − 1.
At this point we have                                  
                               excess F , A(F ) + B(F ) ≥ 1
and the lemma is established.
    The subgraphs U1 , . . . , Ur will be selected in “phases.” In the first phase we
choose U1 , . . . , Uk1 for some integer k1 ≥ 1. We will show that
                                                        
(1.36)                       dim A(Fk1 ) ≤ dim C(Fk1 ) − k1 .
This inequality is worse than equation (1.35) because it doesn’t involve B(Fk1 );
however, it is possibly better, in that the right-hand-side has a −k1 and we may
have k1 > 1.
    The i-th phase will select Uki−1 +1 , Uki−1 +2 , . . . , Uki for some integer ki ≥ ki−1 .
(Hence we set k0 = 0 for consistency and convenience.) The third, fifth, and all odd
numbered phases will be called C-phases, for a reason that will become clear (see
                                 1.8. PROOF OF THEOREM 1.10                                       41


equations (1.43) and (1.58) and nearby discussion); the C-phases select their Ui in
a similar way. The second phase will be called a B-phase; in this phase we choose
Uk1 +1 , . . . , Uk2 to derive an equality akin to equation (1.36) that involves B(Fk1 )
(namely equation (1.56)); unfortunately, the inequality no longer involves A(Fk1 )
and C(Fk2 ), rather it involves A(Fk2 ) and C(Fk2 ). The fourth, sixth, and all even
numbered phases will be called B-phases, because of the way in which their Ui are
selected (see equation (1.59)).
     After the first two phases, i.e., the first C-phase and first B-phase, each sub-
sequent phase, alternating between C-phases and B-phases, allows us to write an
inequality akin to equation (1.35) or (1.36). The inequality after the i-th phase
will involve the values of A, B, C at Fki , Fki−1 , Fki−2 ; roughly speaking, as i gets
larger, the values of A, B, or C on Fki , Fki−1 , Fki−2 must “converge,” since these
are subspaces of finite dimensional spaces F (V ) and F (E). At the point of “con-
vergence” (more precisely, when either equation (1.60) or (1.61) hold) our phases
end after completing the i-th phase, whereupon taking r = ki we will have that
F = Fr satisfies equation (1.35) and we are done.
     Now we give the details. The construction of the Ui and the inequalities we
prove involve definitions of what we call “stars” and “star union data,” given in
Subsection 1.8.2. We shall describe the first and second phase, respectively, in
detail in Subsections 1.8.3 and 1.8.5, respectively. In Subsection 1.8.4 we state and
prove a number of facts used in Subsections 1.8.3 and 1.8.5 in greater generality;
we hope that this greater generality will clarify the proofs. In Subsection 1.8.6 we
finish the proof of Lemma 1.32. As mentioned before, in Subsection 1.8.7, we use
Lemma 1.32 to prove Theorem 1.10.

    1.8.2. Star Union Data. We now fix some graph theoretic notions to de-
scribe the Ui , Fi , and related concepts. For a vertex, u, of G′ [Z≥0 ], let the star at
v, denoted Star(u), be the subgraph of G′ [Z≥0 ] consisting of those edges of G′ [Z≥0 ]
whose head is u and of those vertices that are the endpoints of these edges (the star
at u is easily seen to be a tree, since G′ [Z≥0 ] has no self-loops or multiple edges).

Definition 1.33. For any sequence v = (v1 , . . . , vj ) of vertices of G′ [Z≥0 ], we de-
fine the star union of v to be the union of the stars at v1 , . . . , vj . Furthermore, to any
such sequence v = (v1 , . . . , vj ) we associate the following data, (Ui , Fi , Ii , Xi )i=1,...,j ,
that we call star union data: for positive integer i ≤ j we associate
      (1) the i-th star union, Ui , which is the star union of (v1 , . . . , vi );
      (2) the i-th edge set, Fi = EUi ;
      (3) the i-th interior edge set, Ii ⊂ Fi , the set of edges in Ui whose tail is one
          of v1 , . . . , vi ;
      (4) the i-th interior vertex set, {v1 , . . . , vi }; and
      (5) the i-th exterior vertex set, Xi = VUi \ {v1 , . . . , vi }.

    N.B.: Throughout the rest of this section, the variables Ui , Fi , Ii , Xi and termi-
nology of Definition 1.33, will refer to star union data with respect to the variable
v = (v1 , . . . , vj ), where j will change during the section. Our goal is to construct
v = (v1 , . . . , vr ) such that F = Fr satisfies equation (1.35), but to do so will con-
struct v in phases, and during any part of any phase the variables Ui , Fi , Ii , Xi refer
to the portion of v constructed so far (which limits i to be at most j for the current
value of j)
42                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


    1.8.3. The First C-Phase. We remind the reader that, as explained at the
end of Subsection 1.8.2, Ui , Fi , Ii , Xi are assumed to refer to star union data derived
from a sequence v = (v1 , v2 , . . .), at any stage of its construction.
    Choose any edge, e1 , of minimal rank with we1 6= 0 and let v1 = he1 and let
ρ = rank(v1 ). We claim
                            dim(A(F1 )) + 1 ≤ dim(C(F1 ));
indeed, if v1 is the tail of an edge, f , then wf = 0, by the minimal rank of e1 .
Hence
                          X                   X
(1.37)                           dh we =           dt we = 0.
                       e s.t. he=v1              e s.t. te=v1

Consider the set
                     E 1 = {e | he = v1 and we 6= 0} ⊂ EG′ [Z]≥0 .
We claim that
                                            
(1.38)                            dim C(F1 ) = |E 1 |;
indeed                                           M
                                      F (E) =          F (e),
                                                e∈EG

and since µπ : G′ [Z≥0 ] → G is a covering map, for each f ∈ EG there is at most one
e ∈ EG′ [Z≥0 ] such that µe = f and he = v1 . Hence each nonzero we with e ∈ F1 is
taken to its own component of F (E). So in the terminology of Subsection 1.6.1, the
nonzero we are compartmentally distinct, and hence independent, by Theorem 1.24.
Hence equation (1.38) holds. By contrast, equation (1.37) shows that the dh we with
e ∈ E 1 sum to zero and are therefore dependent; hence
                                          
                               dim A(F1 ) ≤ |E 1 | − 1,
and so
                                                 
(1.39)                     dim A(F1 ) ≤ dim C(F1 ) − 1.
    Assume that there is an e2 ∈ EG′ [Z≥0 ] for which rank(e2 ) = ρ and we2 ∈
                                                                            / C(F1 ).
In this case the first phase continues; we fix any such e2 , set v2 = he2 . We claim
that
                                                            
(1.40)              dim A(F2 )/A(F1 ) ≤ dim C(F2 )/C(F1 ) − 1.
Indeed, let E 2 be the number set of e such that he = v2 and we ∈/ C(F1 ) (i.e., we
is non-zero modulo C(F1 )). Note that C(F1 ) is compartmentalized. Also, the we
with e ∈ E 2 are compartmentally distinct (by the same argument as used for E 1 ,
which is true when e ranges over the edges of any star). Hence, by Theorem 1.24,
the we with e ∈ E 2 are linearly independent in F (E)/C(F1 ). Hence
                                              
                            dim C(F2 )/C(F1 ) = |E 2 |.
However, as with E 1 we have
                                        X
                                               dh we = 0,
                                       e∈E 2
                              1.8. PROOF OF THEOREM 1.10                                 43


                                                                              / E2,
since v2 has rank ρ (so we = 0 for all e with te = v2 ). But if he = v2 and e ∈
then we ∈ C(F1 ) and so A({e}) ∈ A(F1 ). Hence
                                X
                                    dh we ∈ A(F1 ),
                                   e∈E 2

It follows that
                                             
                            dim A(F2 )/A(F1 ) ≤ |E 2 | − 1.
This establishes equation (1.40), and adding that equation to equation (1.39) gives
                                                   
                          dim A(F2 ) ≤ dim C(F2 ) − 2.
    If there is an e3 such that rank(e3 ) = ρ and we3 ∈
                                                      / C(F2 ), then the first phase
continues, with v3 = he3 , and we have
                                                   
                          dim A(F3 ) ≤ dim C(F3 ) − 3.
We similarly find ei and set vi = hei for each positive integer i for which there is
an ei of rank ρ with wei ∈
                         / C(Fi−1 ); for any such i we have
                                                   
(1.41)                    dim A(Fi ) ≤ dim C(Fi ) − i.
But for any such i we have
                                               
(1.42)                               dim C(Fi ) ≥ i;
hence for any such i we have i ≤ dim(F (E)), and so for some k1 ≤ dim(F (E)) this
process stops at i = k1 , i.e., we construct e1 , . . . , ek1 of rank ρ with wei ∈
                                                                                 / C(Fi−1 )
for i = 2, . . . , k1 , but C(Fk1 ) contains all we for rank(e) = ρ. This is the end of the
first phase.
     A concise way to describe the first phase is that we choose any minimal v1 , . . . , vk1
of rank ρ such that
(1.43)                  ∀e ∈ EG[Z≥0 ] of rank ρ,     we ∈ C(Fk1 ),
where minimal means that if we discard any vi from v1 , . . . , vk1 then equation (1.43)
does not hold. We call this a C-phase because the equation (1.43) involves a “C,”
as will all odd numbered phases. Notice that equation (1.41) is somewhat similar
to our desired equation (1.35); one big difference is that equation (1.41) makes no
mention of B, but only of A and C.

     1.8.4. Moseying Sequences. Before describing the second phase, i.e., the
first B-phase, we wish to organize the inequalities we will need into a number of
lemmas. Furthermore, we will usually state these lemmas in a slightly more general
context; this will help illustrate exactly what assumptions are being used.
     We consider the setup and notation of the first two paragraphs of Subsec-
tion 1.8.1, which fixes F , µ : G′ → G, π : G′ [Z≥0 ] → G′ , w ∈ H1⊕ (π ∗ µ∗ F ), and de-
fines wf for any f ∈ EG′ [Z≥0 ] , and defines A(F ), B(F ), C(F ) for any F ⊂ EG′ [Z≥0 ] .
     We will work with a sequence of vertices, v = (v1 , . . . , vs ), of G′ [Z≥0 ], but we
will not assume the vi are constructed by our phases. Instead, we will be careful to
write down our assumptions on the vi in a way that will make clear which of their
properties is used when and how. Our central definition in this general context will
be that of a “moseying sequence.”
44                          1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


Definition 1.34. By a moseying sequence of length s for G′ we mean a sequence
v = (v1 , . . . , vs ) of distinct vertices of G′ [Z] for which rank(vi+1 ) − rank(vi ) is 0
or 1 for each i; if this difference is 1 we say that v jumps at i. We define star
union data, Ui , Fi , Ii , Xi as in Subsection 1.8.2. For ease of notation we define
U0 , F0 , I0 , X0 to be empty (i.e., U0 is the empty graph, F0 , I0 , X0 the empty set).
     Moseying sequences are our basic object of study.
Definition 1.35. A moseying sequence, v, of length s is of increasing dimension
if the integers                                      
                      ni = dim C(Fi ) + dim B(Ii )
satisfy
                       0 = n0 < n1 < n2 < · · · < ns .
Lemma 1.36. Let v be a moseying sequence of length s of increasing dimension
for a digraph, G′ . Then
                                                  
                         s ≤ dim F (E) + dim F (V ) .
Furthermore, for any i ≤ s, Ui has no cycles provided that the girth of G′ [Z] is at
least 2i + 1.
     Proof. The first statement is clear. For the second statement, assume, to the
contrary, that Ui has a cycle. Ui is the union of stars, which are trees of diameter
two. If c is a cycle in Ui of minimal length, then it traverses each vertex at most
once. But every vertex of c not appearing in v must be a leaf (i.e., tail of an edge)
of a star, and hence followed by (and preceded by) a vertex in v. Hence the length
of c is at most twice i. Hence G′ [Z] has a cycle of length at most 2i, contradicting
the hypotheses of the lemma.                                                       
    The inequality in equation (1.41), derived after the first C-phase, will be built
up along further phases to eventually give equation (1.35). However, to express
these later phase inequalities, we shall need some graph theoretic notions, such as
the “overdegree” and “capacity” that we now define.
Definition 1.37. Let v be a moseying sequence of length s for G′ . For any u ∈
VG′ [Z] we define the stable outdegree of u, denoted sod(u), to be the outdegree of u
in Us . (If v is not a vertex of Us , we define its outdegree in Us to be zero.)
    Note that the outdegree of u in Uj−1 , viewed as a function of j, does not change
as soon as rank(vj ) ≥ rank(u); indeed, the edges that affect the outdegree of u are
the edges of rank equal to rank(u) − 1, and such edges come from stars about
vertices of rank(u) − 1. Hence, for any j with 1 ≤ j ≤ s, we have
(1.44)              rank(vj ) ≥ rank(u) =⇒ sod(u) = outdeg(Uj−1 , u),
where outdeg(G, w) denotes the outdegree of w in G. In particular,
                                 sod(vj ) = outdeg(Uj−1 , vj )
for all j = 1, . . . , s.
Definition 1.38. Let v be a moseying sequence of length s for G′ . By the overdegree
of Ui , for an integer, i with 1 ≤ i ≤ s, we mean
                                      X                      
                          Over(Ui ) =      outdeg(Ui , v) − 1 ,
                                        v∈Xi
                             1.8. PROOF OF THEOREM 1.10                              45


    Notice that for any i, the overdegree of Ui is non-negative, since each exterior
vertex of Ui is the tail of some edge in Ui , and hence has outdegree at least one.
Definition 1.39. Let v be a moseying sequence of length s for G′ . For non-negative
integer, i ≤ s, we define the capacity of Ui to be
                            Cap(Ui ) = h0 (Ui ) + Over(Ui ).
     Note that for i ≥ 1, h0 (Ui ) ≥ 1, since Ui is nonempty, and Over(Ui ) ≥ 0; hence
for i ≥ 1 we have Cap(Ui ) ≥ 1. Our fundamental inequalities will use the capacity.
Lemma 1.40. Let v be a moseying sequence of length s for G′ . Assume that Uj
has no cycles for some j ≤ s. Then for any non-negative integers i ≤ j we have
                                               j
                                               X                     
                     Cap(Uj ) = Cap(Ui ) −            sod(vm ) − 1
                                              m=i+1

     Proof. It suffices to prove the lemma for j = i + 1, for then the general lemma
follows by induction on j − i.
     So assume j = i + 1, and set ρ = rank(vi+1 ). Let p0 and p1 , respectively, be
the number of vertices of rank ρ and ρ + 1, respectively, in which the star of vi+1
intersects Ui ; so p0 is 1 or 0 according to whether or not vi+1 ∈ VUi , and p1 is the
number of tails of edges in Star(vi+1 ) that lie in Ui ; let p = p0 + p1 . First, note
that since Ui+1 = Ui ∪ Star(vi+1 ), we have
                                                                     
                χ(Ui+1 ) = χ(Ui ) + χ Star(vi+1 ) − χ Ui ∩ Star(vi+1 ) ;
since Ui , Ui+1 , and any star have h1 = 0, in the above equation we may replace
each χ with h0 , and conclude that
                                                                        
             h0 (Ui+1 ) = h0 (Ui ) + h0 Star(vi+1 ) − h0 Ui ∩ Star(vi+1 ) ;
since Ui ∩ Star(vi+1 ) contains no edges, it has p connected components (p isolated
vertices), and hence
(1.45)                        h0 (Ui+1 ) = h0 (Ui ) + 1 − p.
Second, note that each of the p1 tails of edges of the star adds one to its degree
in Ui+1 over that of Ui ; the remaining tails of star edges have degree one in Ui+1 .
This means that Ui+1 gains p1 over Ui in the overdegree contribution from vertices
of rank ρ + 1. Third, note that p0 = 1 iff vi+1 ∈ VUi iff vi+1 contributes
                         outdeg(Ui , vi+1 ) − 1 = sod(vi+1 ) − 1
to the overdegree of Ui ; if so, this contribution is lost in Ui+1 , since vi+1 becomes
an interior vertex. Hence if p0 = 0 we have
                             Over(Ui+1 ) = Over(Ui ) + p1
and if p0 = 1 we have
                  Over(Ui+1 ) = Over(Ui ) + p1 − (sod(vi+1 ) − 1);
in both cases we may write
                      Over(Ui+1 ) = Over(Ui ) + p − sod(vi+1 ).
Combining this with equation (1.45) yields
                        Cap(Ui+1 ) = Cap(Ui ) + 1 − sod(vi+1 ),
46                   1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


which proves the lemma for j = i + 1 and therefore, as explained earlier, for all
j > i.                                                                         

Lemma 1.41. Let v be a moseying sequence of length s for G′ . Assume that v
jumps at an integer i < s, but not at i + 1, i + 2, . . . , k for some integer k ≤ s.
(We adopt the convention that v jumps at i if i = 0.) Assume that for each edge,
e, of G′ [Z] of rank at most rank(vi ) we have we ∈ C(Fi ). Then for any j with
i + 1 ≤ j ≤ k we have
                                                                 
(1.46)        dim A(Fk )/ A(Fj ) + B(Fi ) ≤ dim C(Fk )/C(Fj ) − (k − j).

     We remark that the assumptions of this lemma are highly restrictive; to apply
this to our phases, i + 1 (or vi+1 ) will have to be the beginning of a B-phase, and k
(or vk ) will lie either in that B-phase or the C-phase immediately thereafter. Also,
if v jumps somewhere between i + 1 and k, then we cannot expect equation (1.46)
to hold unless B(Fi ) is replaced with B(Fi′ ) for an i′ > i.

    Proof. For j = k the lemma is immediate. Let us first establish the case
k = j + 1; the general case will then easily follow by induction on k − j. Let
ρ = rank(vi ).
    Consider that          X              X
                                 dt we =        dh we .
                            te=vj+1        he=vj+1

We have dt we ∈ B(Fi ) for all e with te = vj+1 , and, more generally, for any e of
rank ρ, since we ∈ C(Fi ). Hence
                                 X
(1.47)                                dh we ∈ B(Fi ).
                               he=vj+1

                      ′
                                                       / C(Fj ), and let E ′′ be
Now, as before, let E be those e with he = vj+1 and we ∈
the same but with we ∈ C(Fj ). We have
                                             
                         dim C(Fj+1 )/C(Fj ) = |E ′ |,
since C(Fj ) is a compartmentalized subspace of F (E); yet for e ∈ E ′′ we have
dh we ∈ A(Fj ) and hence
                              X
                                   dh we ∈ A(Fj ),
                                e∈E ′′

which implies, along with equation (1.47) that
             X             X             X
                  dh we =        dh we −      dh we ∈ B(Fi ) + A(Fj ).
             e∈E ′        he=vj+1         e∈E ′′

Hence the dh we ranging over e ∈ E ′ are linearly depedent modulo A(Fj ) + B(Fi ),
and so                                           
                  dim A(Fj+1 )     A(Fj ) + B(Fi ) ≤ |E ′ | − 1.
Hence
                                                             
(1.48)       dim A(Fj+1 )   A(Fj ) + B(Fi ) ≤ dim C(Fj+1 )/C(Fj ) − 1.

This establishes the case k = j + 1 of the lemma.
                            1.8. PROOF OF THEOREM 1.10                               47


   The general case of the lemma now follows from the fact that Fj and hence
C(Fj ) are increasing in j, and hence
                                  k−1
                                    X                     
                dim C(Fk )/C(Fj ) =    dim C(Fm+1 )/C(Fm ) ;
                                           m=j

similarly the spaces A(Fj ) modulo B(Fi ), i.e., viewed as subspaces of F (V )/B(Fi ),
are increasing in j, and hence
                              k−1
                                  X                               
   dim A(Fk )   A(Fj ) + B(Fi ) =     dim A(Fm+1 )   A(Fm ) + B(Fi ) .
                                           m=j

Hence applying equation (1.48) with m replacing j and m over the range j, j +
1, . . . , k − 1 yields the lemma.                                          
Lemma 1.42. Let v be a moseying sequence of length s for G′ . Then for non-
negative integers i ≤ j ≤ s we have
                                            j
                                            X
                                         
                        dim B(Ij )/B(Ii ) ≤   sod(vm ).
                                                 m=i+1

     Proof. Clearly B(Ij )/B(Ii ) is at most the size of Ij \ Ii . But an edge, e, of
G′ [Z], lies in Ij \ Ii (viewing Ii ⊂ Ij as subsets of EG′ [Z] ) precisely when te = vm
for some m between i + 1 and j; furthermore, for each such m, the number of e
with te = vm in Uj is outdeg(Uj , vm ). Hence
                                        j
                                        X
                                     
                    dim B(Ij )/B(Ii ) ≤   outdeg(Uj , vm ).
                                             m=i+1

But outdeg(Uj , vm ) = sod(vm ), either by definition, if j = s or, if j < s, in view
of equation (1.44) and the fact that rank(vj+1 ) ≥ rank(vm ). Hence the lemma
follows.                                                                            
    1.8.5. The First B-Phase. At this point we have finished the first C-phase,
having constructed v1 , . . . , vk1 . If
(1.49)                               B(Fk1 ) ⊂ A(Fk1 ),
then we are done, for then F = Fk1 satisfies equation (1.35), in view of equa-
tion (1.41) with i = k1 . In this case we end our phases, and Lemma 1.32 is finished
in this case. Otherwise B(Fk1 ) is not entirely contained in A(Fk1 ). At this point
we enter the second phase; the rough idea is to generate an inequality similar to
equation (1.41), but which involves B(Fk1 ); this will come at the expense of making
the A and C terms involve Fk2 as opposed to Fk1 .
    We will choose vk1 +1 , . . . , vk2 minimal with
(1.50)                       B(Fk1 ) ⊂ A(Fk1 ) + B(Ik2 ),
which we do as follows: choose any e ∈ Fk1 with dt we ∈ / A(Fk1 ), and set vk1 +1 = te;
then dt we ∈ B(Ik1 +1 ); then choose any e′ ∈ Fk1 with dt we′ ∈  / A(Ik1 ) + B(Ik1 +1 )
and take vk1 +2 = te′ if such an e′ exists; continuing on in this fashion we generate
a new vertices vi until we reach a vertex vk2 such that
                        ∀e ∈ Fk1 ,     dt we ∈ A(Fk1 ) + B(Ik2 );
48                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


such a point is reached, since we have proper containments
(1.51)        A(Fk1 ) ⊂ A(Fk1 ) + B(Ik1 +1 ) ⊂ A(Fk1 ) + B(Ik1 +2 ) ⊂ · · ·
which are subsets of the finite dimensional space F (V ). Hence this point is reached
with                                                
                                k2 − k1 ≤ dim F (V ) ,
and since k1 ≤ dim(F (V )) (see equation (1.42) and the discussion below it), we
have
                                                         
(1.52)                     k2 ≤ dim F (V ) + dim F (E) .
The choice of vk1 +1 , . . . , vk2 comprises the second phase; we call this a (the first)
B-phase because of the prominence of the letter “B” in equation (1.50). Now
we combine a number of inequalities from Subsection 1.8.4 to prove a sequel to
equation (1.41).
    First, Lemma 1.40 with j = v2k and i = 0 (for which the lemma is still valid)
shows that
                                                  k2
                                                  X
(1.53)                          Cap(Uk2 ) = k2 −     sod(vm )
                                               m=1

(note that Uk2 has no cycles, using Lemma 1.36). Second, Lemma 1.41 with k = k2
and i = j = k1 yields
                                                              
(1.54)    dim A(Fk2 )/(A(Fk1 ) + B(Fk1 )) ≤ dim C(Fk2 )/C(Fk1 ) − (k2 − k1 ).
Third, we have Ik1 = ∅ since v1 , . . . , vk1 are all of rank ρ. Hence Lemma 1.42 with
j = k2 and i = k1 gives
                                                   k2
                                                   X
                                               
(1.55)         dim B(Ik2 ) = dim B(Ik2 )/B(Ik1 ) ≤    sod(vi ).
                                                           i=k1 +1

    We have now established three inequalities in equations (1.53), (1.54), and
(1.55). We now establish a simple inequality to describe the end of the first B-
phase.
    Equations (1.55) and (1.41) with i = k1 imply that
                                                      k2
                                                      X
                                             
           dim A(Fk1 ) + B(Ik2 ) ≤ dim C(Fk1 ) − k1 +    sod(vi ),
                                                              i=k1 +1

and in view of equation (1.50) this implies that
                                                      k2
                                                      X
                                             
           dim A(Fk1 ) + B(Fk1 ) ≤ dim C(Fk1 ) − k1 +    sod(vi ),
                                                               i=k1 +1

     Equation (1.54) added to this gives
                                                     
                                dim A(Fk2 ) + B(Fk1 )
                                             k2
                                             X
                                     
                        ≤ dim C(Fk2 ) − k2 +    sod(vi )
                                                 i=k1 +1
                                               k2
                                               X
                                       
                          = dim C(Fk2 ) − k2 +    sod(vi )
                                                   i=1
                                 1.8. PROOF OF THEOREM 1.10                           49


(since sod(vi ) = 0 for i = 1, . . . , k1 )
                                             k2
                                           X               
                             = dim C(Fk2 ) −    sod(vi ) − 1 .
                                                i=1

Then using equation (1.53) we get
                                                     
(1.56)             dim A(Fk2 ) + B(Fk1 ) ≤ dim C(Fk2 ) − Cap(Uk2 ).
This equation is all we need to know about the B-phase we have just finished.
    If
(1.57)                           B(Fk2 ) ⊂ A(Fk2 ) + B(Fk1 ),
then our phases are over and we easily establish Lemma 1.32: indeed, we have
                                                                   
      dim A(Fk2 ) + B(Fk2 ) = dim A(Fk2 ) + B(Fk1 ) ≤ dim C(Fk2 ) − 1
since Cap(Uk2 ) ≥ 1 (indeed, h0 (Uk2 ) ≥ 1 and the overdegree is non-negative).
Hence we have established equation (1.35) with F = Fk2 and we are done.
    Otherwise we undergo a second C-phase, possibly a second B-phase, possibly a
third C-phase, etc. So for i = 2, 3, . . ., the (2i − 1)-th phase, or i-th C-phase, adds
vertices vk2i−2 +1 , . . . , vk2i−1 of rank ρ + i − 1 so that
(1.58)              ∀e ∈ EG[Z≥0 ] of rank ρ + i − 1,      we ∈ C(Fk2i−1 )
(for j ≥ k2i−1 + 1 we successively add a vertex vj which is the head of an edge, e,
of rank ρ + i − 1 for which we ∈ / C(Fj ), augmenting j until no such edges exist);
the (2i)-th phase, or the i-th B-phase, adds vk2i−1 +1,...,k2i so that
(1.59)                        B(Fk2i−1 ) ⊂ A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Ik2i );
as in the first B-phase, the i-th B-phase selects its vertices by choosing an e ∈ Fk2i−1
for which
                             dt we ∈
                                   / A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Ik2i−1 ),
setting vk2i−1 +1 = te; then choosing an e′ ∈ Fk2i−1 for which
                              dt we′ ∈
                                     / A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Ik2i−1 +1 ),
                         ′
setting vk2i−1 +2 = te ; then repeating this procedure until reaching vk2i such that
for all e ∈ Fk2i−1 we have
                                 dt we ∈ A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Ik2i ),
whereupon equation (1.59) holds (minimally, i.e., it would fail to hold if we omitted
any vertex, vm , added during this phase).
    The phases end either at the end of a C-phase or B-phase as follows: the phases
end at the j-th C-phase for j ≥ 1 when
(1.60)                       B(Fk2j−1 ) ⊂ A(Fk2j−1 ) + B(Fk2j−3 )
(with k−1 = 0 and so Fk−1 = ∅ for the case j = 1), which restricts to equation (1.49)
for j = 1; the phases end at the j-th B-phase for j ≥ 1 when
(1.61)                        B(Fk2j ) ⊂ A(Fk2j ) + B(Fk2j−1 ),
which restricts to equation (1.57) for j = 1. In the next subsection show that one
of these two conditions eventually holds for some finite j, and that F = Fr with
r = k2j satisfies equation (1.35). We already have all the main inequalities needed
to prove this, and just need to apply them to the phases beyond the second phase.
50                    1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


     1.8.6. End of the Proof of Lemma 1.32.
     Proof of Lemma 1.32. Now we claim that, for all i ≥ 1, at the end of the
i-th C-phase we have
(1.62)                                       
  dim A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Fk2i−3 ) ≤ dim C(Fk2i−1 ) − Cap(Uk2i−2 ) − (k2i−1 − k2i−2 )
(for i = 1 we understand that k−1 = k0 = 0 and F0 = ∅), and that, for all i ≥ 1, at
the end of the i-th B-phase we have
                                                     
(1.63)        dim A(Fk2i ) + B(Fk2i−1 ) ≤ dim C(Fk2i ) − Cap(Uk2i ).
We shall prove these by induction. To do so, first note that after i phases we
produce a sequence v = (v1 , . . . , vki ) that is of increasing dimension, since each
vm of a C-phase increases dim(C(Fm )) by at least one, and each vm of a B-phase
increases dim(B(Fm )) by at least one. Hence, according to Lemma 1.36,
                                                           
(1.64)                   ki ≤ dim F (V ) + dim F (E) ,
and Uki contains no cycles, using the hypotheses of Lemma 1.32.
    Let us also note that the phases eventually end. Indeed, if k2j = k2j−1 , then
according to equation (1.61) we finish. Hence, we are not done by the j-th B-phase
we have
                k2j > k2j−1 ≥ k2j−2 > k2j−3 ≥ · · · ≥ k2 > k1 ≥ 1,
so k2j ≥ j + 1; in view of equation (1.64), the total number of phases is less than
                                                     
                           2 dim F (V ) + dim F (E) .

     Equation (1.63) has been established for i = 1 in equation (1.56). So let us
first show that equation (1.63) implies equation (1.62) with i replaced by i + 1.
     So assume equation (1.63) for some i ≥ 1. By Lemma 1.41, since v jumps at
k2i−1 but does not jump thereafter until k2i+1 , we have
                                                            
                      dim A(Fk2i+1 )/(A(Fk2i ) + B(Fk2i−1 ))
                                              
                    ≤ dim C(Fk2i+1 )/C(Fk2i ) − (k2i+1 − k2i ).
Adding this to equation (1.63) yields
                                             
  dim A(Fk2i+1 ) + B(Fk2i−1 ) ≤ dim C(Fk2i+1 ) − Cap(Uk2i ) − (k2i+1 − k2i ).
This is equation (1.62), with i replaced by i + 1.
    Finally assume equation (1.62) for some value of i ≥ 1; we shall conclude that
equation (1.63) holds for the same value of i. By Lemma 1.42 we have
                                                  k2i
                                                  X
                                          
                   dim B(Ik2i )/B(Ik2i−2 ) ≤                sod(vm ).
                                               m=k2i−2 +1

This implies that
(1.65)
                                                                   k2i
                                                                        X
   dim A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Ik2i )   A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Ik2i−2 ) ≤                      sod(vm ).
                                                                 m=k2i−2 +1

     In view of equation (1.59), and since Ik2i ⊂ Fk2i−1 , we have
(1.66)             A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Fk2i−1 ) = A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Ik2i );
                             1.8. PROOF OF THEOREM 1.10                                 51


similarly we have

                    A(Fk2i−3 ) + B(Fk2i−3 ) = A(Fk2i−3 ) + B(Ik2i−2 )

and therefore

(1.67)              A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Fk2i−3 ) = A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Ik2i−2 )

Given equations (1.66) and (1.67), equation (1.65) can be rewritten as
(1.68)
                                                            Xk2i
  dim A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Fk2i−1 )     A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Fk2i−3 ) ≤            sod(vm ).
                                                                   m=k2i−2 +1

Adding this to equation (1.62) gives
                                                        
                             dim A(Fk2i−1 ) + B(Fk2i−1 )

                                                                   k2i
                                                                   X
                        
        ≤ dim C(Fk2i−1 ) − Cap(Uk2i−2 ) − (k2i−1 − k2i−2 ) +                 sod(vm )
                                                                m=k2i−2 +1

                                    
                    = dim C(Fk2i−1 ) − Cap(Uk2i ) + (k2i − k2i−1 )
in view of Lemma 1.40 with i, j respectively set to k2i−2 , k2i . Adding this to
Lemma 1.41 with i, j, k respectively replaced with k2i−2 , k2i−1 , k2i yields
                                                      
            dim A(Fk2i ) + B(Fk2i−1 ) ≤ dim C(Fk2i ) − Cap(Uk2i ).

This proves equation (1.63).
     At this point we have established equations (1.62) and (1.63), and the fact that
the phases eventually end. Now we claim that Lemma 1.32 easily follows. Indeed,
if our phases end at the j-th B-phase, then

                           B(Fk2j ) ⊂ A(Fk2j ) + B(Fk2j−1 ),

and so equation (1.63) gives
                                                     
                dim A(Fk2j ) + B(Fk2j ) ≤ dim C(Fk2j ) − Cap(Uk2j ).

Since Uk2j is non-empty, its capacity is at least one, and hence F = Fr with r = k2j
satisfies equation (1.35). Similarly, if our phases end at the j-th C-phase, then

                         B(Fk2j−1 ) ⊂ A(Fk2j−1 ) + B(Fk2j−3 ),

and so equation (1.62) gives
                                                            
                 dim A(Fk2j−1 ) + B(Fk2j−1 ) ≤ dim C(Fk2j−1 ) − 1,

since
                          Cap(Uk2j−2 ) + (k2j−1 − k2j−2 ) ≥ 1
(for j = 1 this follows since k1 > 0, and for j ≥ 2 this follows since Uk2j−2 is
nonempty). Hence, similarly, F = Fr with r = k2j−1 satisfies equation (1.35). 
52                     1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


     1.8.7. Proof of Theorem 1.10.

     Proof (of Theorem 1.10). First we will verify Theorem 1.10 in some spe-
cial cases.
     Lemma 1.32 establishes Theorem 1.10 in the case where m.e.(F ) = 0.
Definition 1.43. A sheaf, E, on a digraph, G, is edge supported if E(V ) = 0.
     For an edge supported sheaf, E, it is immediate that for any covering map
φ : G′ → G we have
                     htwist
                      1     (φ∗ E) = m.e.(φ∗ E) = deg(φ) dim(E(E)).
This establishes Theorem 1.10 in the case where F is edge supported and φ is any
covering map.
    Next we introduce a type of sheaf which will be an important tool.
Definition 1.44. A sheaf, F , on a graph G, is said to be tight if the maximum
excess of F occurs at and only at F (V ).
Lemma 1.45. For any sheaf, F , on a digraph, G, there is a tight sheaf, F ′ , that
is a subsheaf of F , such that m.e.(F ′ ) = m.e.(F ). Furthermore, let F ′ ⊂ F be
sheaves on a graph, G, with −χ(F ′ ) = m.e.(F ) (which includes the situation in the
previous sentence); then we have m.e.(F /F ′ ) = 0.
    Proof. Let F be a sheaf on G, and let U ⊂ F (V ) be the minimum subspace
of F (V ) on which the maximum excess occurs. Let F ′ be the subsheaf of F such
that F ′ (V ) = U and F ′ (E) = Γht (U ). We have that m.e.(F ′ ) = m.e.(F ) and the
maximum excess of F ′ occurs at and only at F ′ (V ) (by the minimality of U ). This
establishes the first sentence in the lemma. In particular
                             m.e.(F ) = m.e.(F ′ ) = −χ(F ′ ).
    For the second sentence of the lemma, we claim that F /F ′ has maximum excess
zero, for if not then we have compartmentalized
                        U ⊂ F (V )/F ′ (V ),   W ⊂ F (E)/F ′ (E)
with dh W, dt W ⊂ U and dim(U ) < dim(W ). So let U ′ be the inverse image of U in
F (V ) (under the map F (V ) → F (V )/F ′ (V )), and W ′ that of W in F (E). We have
that U ′ and W ′ are compartmentalized. If w′ ∈ W ′ , we claim that dh,F w′ must lie
in U ′ ; indeed, [w′ ], the class of w′ in F (V )/F ′ (V ), is taken to U via dh,F /F ′ , and
we have a commutative diagram
                                 F (E)     ✲ F (E)/F ′ (E)


                                  ❄                 ❄
                               F (V )      ✲ F (V )/F ′ (V )
and particular elements
                          w′ ∈ W ′                  ✲ [w′ ] ∈ W


                              ❄                            ❄
                           dh,F w′        ✲ [dh,F w′ ] = dh,F /F ′ [w′ ] ∈ U
                              1.8. PROOF OF THEOREM 1.10                                  53


Hence [dh,F w′ ], the class of dh,F w′ in F (V )/F ′ (V ), lies in U and hence dh,F w′
lies in U ′ . Similarly dt,F w′ lies in U ′ , and hence W ′ ⊂ Γht (U ′ ). Since U ′ , W ′ are
compartmentalized, it follows that
        excess(F , U ′ ) ≥    dim(W ′ ) − dim(U ′ )
                         =    dim(W ) + dim(F ′ (E)) − dim(U ) − dim(F ′ (V )).
Since dim(F ′ (E)) − dim(F ′ (V )) = −χ(F ′ ) = m.e.(F ′ ) = m.e.(F ), the above dis-
played equation implies that
            excess(F , U ′ ) ≥ dim(W ) − dim(U ) + m.e.(F ) ≥ 1 + m.e.(F )
which is a contradiction.                                                                 
     Returning to the proof of Theorem 1.10, we claim that it suffices to establish it
for tight sheaves; indeed, consider an arbitrary sheaf, F , and apply Lemma 1.45 to
obtain a sheaf tight sheaf, F ′ , as described in the lemma. For any map φ : G′ → G,
we have an exact sequence
                          0 → φ∗ F ′ → φ∗ F → φ∗ (F /F ′ ) → 0.
We have that F /F ′ has maximum excess zero, and hence so does φ∗ (F /F ′ ); by
Lemma 1.32,                                      
                              htwist
                               1     φ∗ (F /F ′ ) = 0
provided that φ is a covering map with the Abelian girth of G′ at least
                                                          
                      2 dim (F /F ′ )(V ) + dim (F /F ′ )(E) + 1
                                                 
                  ≤ 2 dim F (V ) + dim F (E) + 1.
In this case we get in the long exact sequence beginning
           0 → H1twist (φ∗ F ′ ) → H1twist (φ∗ F ) → H1twist (φ∗ (F /F ′ )) → · · ·
amounts to
                        0 → H1twist (φ∗ F ′ ) → H1twist (φ∗ F ) → 0,
or
                            H1twist (φ∗ F ′ ) ≃ H1twist (φ∗ F ).
Hence to prove Theorem 1.10 for all F of a given maximum excess, it suffices to
prove it for those of the F that are tight.
    We finish the proof by induction on m.e.(F ) via a second exact sequence.
Lemma 1.46. Let F be a tight sheaf on a graph, G, of maximum excess at least
one. Then there exists a subsheaf, F ′′ , of F , such that
                          m.e.(F ′′ ) = −χ(F ′′ ) = m.e.(F ) − 1,
and such that F /F ′′ is edge supported and dim((F /F ′′ )(E)) = 1.
     Proof. Let F ′′ be any subsheaf such that F ′′ (V ) = F (V ) and F ′′ (E) is a
codimension one subspace of F (E). Then F /F ′′ is edge supported with the dimen-
sion of (F /F ′′ )(E) equal one. We claim that, furthermore, the maximum excess of
F ′′ is m.e.(F ) − 1; indeed this excess is achieved by F ′′ (V ) = F (V ); furthermore,
for any U properly contained in F ′′ (V ) = F (V ) we have
                     excess(F ′′ , U ) ≤ excess(F , U ) ≤ m.e.(F ) − 1.
                                                                                          
54                       1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


    We now prove Theorem 1.10 by induction upon m.e.(F ). The base case,
m.e.(F ) = 0, was established in Lemma 1.32. Assume that we have established
that Theorem 1.10 holds whenever m.e.(F ) ≤ k for some integer k ≥ 0. We wish
to prove Theorem 1.10 for all F of maximum excess k + 1, and we know it suffices
to do so when F is tight. So let F be a tight sheaf of maximum excess of k + 1,
and let F ′′ be any subsheaf as in Lemma 1.46. Then Theorem 1.10 holds for F ′′ ,
since F ′′ has maximum excess k; so for φ : G′ → G of girth greater than
                                                         
                             2 dim F ′′ (V ) + dim F ′′ (E)
                                                       
                         ≤ 2 dim F (V ) + dim F (E)

we have

(1.69)                    htwist
                           1     (φ∗ F ′′ ) = m.e.(φ∗ F ′′ ) = deg(φ)k.

Since, by the construction of F ′′ in Lemma 1.46, we have

                                       χ(F ′′ ) = χ(F ) + 1;

by tightness of F we have χ(F ) = −k − 1 and hence

                                   −χ(F ′′ ) = k = m.e.(F ′′ );

hence

         htwist
          0     (φ∗ F ′′ ) = χ(φ∗ F ′′ ) + htwist
                                            1     (φ∗ F ′′ ) = deg(φ)(−k) + m.e.(φ∗ F ′′ )

                               = deg(φ)(−k) + deg(φ)(k) = 0.
We have a short exact sequence

                           0 → φ∗ F ′′ → φ∗ F → φ∗ (F /F ′′ ) → 0,

which yields the long exact sequence

             0 → H1twist (φ∗ F ′′ ) → H1twist (φ∗ F ) → H1twist (φ∗ (F /F ′′ )) → 0,

since htwist
       0     (φ∗ F ′′ ) = 0. Hence

(1.70)               htwist
                      1     (φ∗ F ) = htwist
                                       1     (φ∗ F ′′ ) + htwist
                                                           1     (φ∗ (F /F ′′ )).

But according to Lemma 1.46, F /F ′′ is edge supported, and we therefore know
that Theorem 1.10 holds for F /F ′′ for any covering map, φ, and hence

                    htwist
                     1     (φ∗ (F /F ′′ )) = deg(φ)m.e.(F /F ′′ ) = deg(φ).

Therefore equations (1.69) and (1.70) shows that

                         htwist
                          1     (φ∗ F ) = deg(φ)(k + 1) = m.e.(φ∗ F )

This establishes Theorem 1.10 for all tight F with m.e.(F ) = k + 1.
    Hence, by induction on the maximum excess of F , Theorem 1.10 holds for all
sheaves, F , on G.
                                                                             
                              1.9. CONCLUDING REMARKS                                 55


                             1.9. Concluding Remarks
    In this section we conclude with a few remarks about the results in this chapter
and ideas for further research.
    We would like to know how much we can prove about the maximum excess
without appealing to homology theory. Our main application of homology theory
to the maximum excess was Theorem 1.10, which implies that the maximum excess
is a first quasi-Betti number. But part of the proof of Theorem 1.10, namely
Subsection 1.8.7, involved a lot of direct reasoning about the maximum excess
and short exact sequences. While we believe that the interaction between twisted
homology and maximum excess is interesting, we also think that a treatment of
maximum excess without homology might give some new insights into the maximum
excess.
    The maximum excess gives an interpretation of the limit of
                                    htwist
                                     i     (φ∗ F )/ deg(φ)
over covering maps φ : G′ → G for a sheaf, F , of F-vector spaces on a digraph G.
It would be interesting to have an interpretation of
                                     dim(Exti (φ∗ F , φ∗ G))
                              lim
                                φ          deg(φ)
for any sheaves F , G; the maximum excess gives the interpretation in the special
case where G is the structure sheaf, F, in which case the Ext groups reduce to (duals
of) homology groups. We would also be interesting in generalizations of this to a
wider class of settings, such as an arbitrary finite category, or an interesting subclass
such as semitopological categories (defined as categories where any morphism of an
object to itself must be the identity morphism; see [Fri05]).
     We would also be interested in knowing if there is a good algorithm for com-
puting the maximum excess of a sheaf exactly, or even just giving interesting upper
and lower bounds on it. This would also be interesting for certain types of sheaves.
For example, it would be interesting to know classes of sheaves for which the first
twisted Betti number equals the maximum excess, in addition to edge simple sheaves
of Theorem 1.22.
     Notice that if G is an undirected graph, all the discussion in this chapter goes
through. Either one can orient each edge and use the notation in this chapter, or
just rewrite the notation in this chapter without reference to heads or tails. We see
that the distinction between heads and tails is never essential. For example, rather
than having twists at the tails of edges, we can have them at the heads and tails of
edges. Rather than define a canonical d = dF to define homology, we simply define
homology as
                                      Exti (F , F)∨ ,
which, by the injective resolution of F, becomes the homology groups of
                         · · · → 0 → ⊕e F (e) → ⊕v F (v) → 0,
where each F (e) is really
                                        (F (e))2 /∆e
where ∆e is the diagonal in (F (e))2 (see the discussion regarding equation (1.19)
that appears just below equation (1.20)). Choosing an identification of (F (e))2 /∆e
with F (e) via (a, b) 7→ a − b or (a, b) 7→ b − a amounts to choosing an orientation for
56                   1. FOUNDATIONS OF SHEAVES ON GRAPHS


e. The price of giving a “canonical” treatment of the undirected case, i.e., avoiding
edge orientations, is that one has to work with (F (e))2 /∆e instead of F (e).
                                   CHAPTER 2


              The Hanna Neumann Conjecture

                                2.1. Introduction
    Howson, in [How54], showed that if K, L are nontrivial, finitely generated
subgroups of a free group, F , then K ∩ L is finitely generated, and moreover that
(2.1)      rank(K ∩ L) − 1 ≤ 2 rank(K) rank(L) − rank(K) − rank(L).
Hanna Neumann, in [Neu56, Neu57] improved this bound to what is now called
the Hanna Neumann Bound,
                                                        
(2.2)        rank(K ∩ L) − 1 ≤ 2 rank(K) − 1 rank(L) − 1 ;
furthermore, she conjectured that one can remove the factor of 2 in this bound, i.e.,
that
                                                               
(2.3)            rank(K ∩ L) − 1 ≤ rank(K) − 1 rank(L) − 1 ;
this conjecture is now known as the Hanna Neumann Conjecture (or HNC). One
goal of this chapter is to prove the HNC. Moreover, we shall prove a strengthened
form of the conjecture, first studied by Walter Neumann in [Neu90], known as the
Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture (or SHNC); we will state the strength-
ened conjecture in the next section.
Theorem 2.1. The Hanna Neumann Conjecture and the Strengthened Hanna Neu-
mann Conjecture hold.
    These conjectures have received considerable attention (see [Bur71, Imr77b,
Imr77a, Ser83, Ger83, Sta83, Neu90, Tar92, Dic94, Tar96, Iva99, Arz00,
DF01, Iva01, Kha02, MW02, JKM03, Neu07, Eve08, Min10]). However,
our proof uses very different methods from the previous papers.
    The main new idea in our approach to the SHNC is to reduce it to the vanishing
maximum excess of a type of sheaf we call a ρ-kernel. Although this was described
in the introduction to this paper, we can be a bit more precise here in view of the
developments in Chapter 1. The SHNC has a well-known reformulation in terms
of an inequality involving the reduced cyclicity of graphs; we shall reformulate this
in terms of two graphs, the inequality now saying that the reduced cyclicity of
one graph is less than that of another. This would follow if we can (1) realize both
graphs as sheaves over some base graph, G, (2) find a surjection of the first onto the
second, and (3) show that the kernel (a sheaf) has vanishing maximum excess, in
view of the fact that the maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti number than reduces
to the reduced cyclicity on a sheaves associated to graphs. We shall use Galois
graph theory to carry this out; then the base graph, G, will be a Cayley graph; the
resulting kernels (for the SHNC) will be called ρ-kernels. It is interesting to note
the surjections we use for the SHNC don’t generally exist as surjections of graphs,
                                          57
58                     2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


rather only as surjections of sheaves; hence in representing graphs as sheaves, the
“additional morphisms” we get are crucial to the construction of ρ-kernels and
hence to our proof of the SHNC.
     It turns out that some ρ-kernels have nonvanishing maximum excess (at least
if one defines ρ-kernels in a broad sense). However, any graph, L, of interest to us
in the SHNC, will have a family of associated ρ-kernels, and we will prove that the
generic maximum excess in this family is zero, for each L. To do this we shall use
Galois theory and symmetry to argue that if this generic maximum excess does not
vanish then it is large, i.e., a multiple of the order of the associated Galois group.
Then we will give an inductive argument, showing that if the generic maximum
excess of ρ-kernels for L is positive, then the same is true when we remove some
edge from L, provided that L has positive reduced cyclicity. The base case of the
induction, when L has vanishing reduced cyclicity, is trivial to establish. Hence
each L of interest in the SHNC has a ρ-kernel of vanishing maximum excess, and
this establishes in SHNC.
     We emphasize that our proof of the SHNC also uses Theorem 1.10, that im-
plies that the “maximum excess” is first quasi-Betti number. However, it is quite
possible that one can prove the inequalities we need for the SHNC for without
Theorem 1.10. Furthermore, in the conclusion to this chapter we will give a slight
variant of our proof of the SHNC that will avoid any reference to Theorem 1.10 or
any homology theories (although this would require the lengthy combinatorial ar-
gument of Appendix A). However, regardless of how we present the proof, we shall
explain in the conclusion that the homology theory can provide valuable insight
into the maximum excess.
     This paper shows that the SHNC is not merely an attempt to improve an
inequality by a factor of two; our study of the SHNC has lead to new ideas in sheaves
on graphs that can be applied to graph theory. This came as a surprise to us at
first, although it is perhaps less surprising in retrospect, for a number of reasons.
First, the HNC and SHNC seem to describe a fairly fundamental question in group
theory (of how rank behaves under intersection). Second, the SHNC can be viewed
as a graph theory question involving the reduced cyclicity, which is an interesting
graph invariant (e.g. it scales under covering maps). Third, the SHNC, viewed in
terms of the Galois graph theory, has a simple homological explanation, namely
the vanishing of a limit homology group. The vanishing of (co)homology groups
has a vast literature and importance; the SHNC is an interesting and seemingly
difficult result in the family of homology group vanishing theorems. Fourth, Lior
Silberman has pointed out to us that the reduced cyclicity is the discrete analogue
of L2 Betti numbers; the L2 Betti number was defined first by Atiyah ([Ati76]), and
has been the subject of much surrounding the “Atiyah conjecture” (see [Lüc02]).
Mineyev’s article, [Min10], also makes a connection between the SHNC and L2
Betti numbers.
     At this point we can give more motivation for the use sheaf theory in this chap-
ter, i.e., why we do not just use graphs and their homology. Our reformulation
of the SHNC begins by searching for a morphism involving the graphs of interest
to the SHNC. In order for this morphism to exist, to be surjective, and to have a
kernel, we must work with more general objects than graphs. In many topological
situations, the topological spaces are sufficiently “robust” that one does not have to
generalize the objects. However, in non-Hausdorff spaces, such as graphs or those
             2.2. THE STRENGTHENED HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE                        59


in algebraic geometry, many geometric notions, such as “connect two points with
a path,” “form a cone,” etc., don’t make sense or are very awkward to implement.
So for graphs we use sheaf theory, which is a simple (co)homology theory that is
adapted to our spaces, but general and expressive enough for appropriate surjec-
tions and kernels to exist. Of course, it is possible that there are other reasonable
frameworks that one could use instead of sheaves.
     The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In Section 2.2 we describe the
SHNC and previous work on the HNC and SHNC, including some resolved special
cases of the SHNC. In Section 2.3 we give a common graph theoretic reformulation
of the SHNC. In Section 2.4 we describe applications of “graph Galois theory” to
simplifying the SHNC in a way that leads to the construction of ρ-kernels; this
builds on some of the Galois graph theory described ealier, in Section 1.3. In
Section 2.5 we construct ρ-kernels and prove that if their maximum excesses vanish
then the SHNC holds; we also describe what we call “k-th power kernels,” which
generalize ρ-kernels and which will be necessary to prove our main theorems about
the generic maximum excess of ρ-kernels. In Section 2.6 we use symmetry to prove
that the generic maximum excess of a certain type of k-th power kernel is divisible
by the order of a group associated to the class of kernels. In Section 2.7 we prove
some comparison theorems about how the maximum excesses of different classes
of k-th power kernels compare; the main theorem that we prove shows that if ρ-
kernels associated to a graph, L, have positive generic maximum excess, then the
same is true of a graph L′ that consist of L with one edge discarded, provided
that ρ(L′ ) = ρ(L) − 1. In Section 2.8 we briefly combine a number of theorems of
previous sections to argue that if the SHNC does not hold, then for some L we have
the class of ρ-kernels associated to L have positive generic maximum excess, which
by the results of Section 2.7 means that the same is true for some L with ρ(L) = 0,
which we easily show is impossible. This establishes the SHNC. In Section 2.9
we make some concluding remarks, including a variant of our proof that avoids
Theorem 1.10 and any reference to homology theory. Such a proof will require
Appendix A, where we show that vanishing maximum excess of enough ρ-kernels
implies the SHNC, but we do so just using elementary graph theory; this shows
that a lot of the sheaf theory can be translated into direct graph theoretic terms;
it also shows that a simple sheaf theoretic calculation may translate into a much
longer graph theoretic calculation.



           2.2. The Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture
    In this section we state the SHNC and comment on previous work on the HNC
and SHNC, including some established special cases of these conjectures.
    Walter Neumann, in [Neu90], showed that the Hanna Neumann Bound, i.e.,
equation (2.2), could be strengthened to

                           σ(K, L) ≤ 2 rk−1 (K) rk−1 (L),

where rkn (G) denotes max(rank(G) + n, 0), and where
                                    X
                     σ(K, L) =                 rk−1 (K ∩ x−1 Lx),
                                 KxF ∈K\F /L
60                      2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


the summation being over the double coset, K\F /L, representatives, x; taking x
be the identity in the summation shows that
                                rk−1 (K ∩ L) ≤ σ(K, L),
so that Walter Neumann’s above bound strengthens the Hanna Neumann Bound.
Walter Neumann further formulated the conjecture that
(2.4)                         σ(K, L) ≤ rk−1 (K) rk−1 (L),
now known as the Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture (or SHNC). For the
rest of this section we review previous work on the HNC and SHNC.
     One collection of results on the problem involves general bounds on σ(K, L) or
rk1 (K ∩ L). It turns out that all general bounds we know for the HNC, i.e., on
rk1 (K ∩ L), also are known to hold for σ(K, L). Also, all bounds we know are of
the form
           σ(K, L) ≤ 2 rank(K) rank(L) + c1 rank(K) + c2 rank(L) + c3
for ranks K, L sufficiently large, where c1 , c2 , c3 are constants depending on the
bound; thus all improvements of Howson’s original bound are in the lower order
terms, i.e., in the ci ’s. The improved bounds on σ(K, L) after [How54, Neu56,
Neu57] include the bound
                     2 rk−1 (K) rk−1 (L) − min(rk−1 (K), rk−1 (L))
of Burns in [Bur71]1, the bound
                  rk−1 (K) rk−1 (L) + max(rk−2 (K) rk−2 (L) − 1, 0)
of Tardos [Tar92, Tar96], and, what is the best bound prior to ours,
(2.5)                    rk−1 (K) rk−1 (L) + rk−3 (K) rk−3 (L)
of Dicks and Formanek in [DF01].
    Another collection of results concerns special cases of the HNC and SHNC that
are resolved. To be precise, say that the “HNC holds for (K, L)” if equation (2.3)
holds, and say that K is universal for the HNC if for any L, the HNC holds for
(K, L). Similarly for the SHNC and equation (2.4). Similar to before, all results we
know that resolve special cases of the HNC also resolve those cases of the SHNC.
Note that any finitely generated free group, F , is a subgroup of F2 , the free group
on two generators, so we are free to assume that F = F2 in the HNC and SHNC.
Here are some results on special cases of the SHNC that are easy to describe in
group theoretic terms:
     (1) K is universal for the SHNC if it is of rank at most three ([DF01]), in
          view of equation (2.5), with rank two settled earlier by Tardos ([Tar92]);
     (2) K is universal for the SHNC if it is positively generated (see [Kha02,
          MW02, Neu07]);
     (3) K is universal for the SHNC for “most” K (see [Neu90, JKM03]);
     (4) the SHNC holds either for (K, L) or for (K, L′ ) for any K, L that are
          subgroups of F2 , where L′ is obtained from L by the map taking each
          generator of F2 to its inverse (see [JKM03]).

    1 Bounds appearing before [Neu90] are stated as bounds on rk (K ∩ L), but actually give
                                                                −1
bounds on σ(K, L) as well.
                 2.3. GRAPH THEORETIC FORMULATION OF THE SHNC                          61


The result of item (3) on “most” groups, of Walter Neumann ([Neu90]), and some
additional results on the SHNC, such as Corollary 3.2 of [MW02], are easier to
describe using a graph theoretic formulation of the SHNC that we give in the next
section. It is also known that the SHNC is related to the coherence problem in
one-relator groups ([Wis05]).

              2.3. Graph Theoretic Formulation of the SHNC
      The goal of this section is to describe an equivalent formulation of the HNC and
SHNC in graph theoretic terms involving fibre products; this formulation is implicit
in [How54], but more explicit in [Imr77b, Imr77a, Ger83, Sta83, Neu90] and
other references in [Dic94]. There is another equivalent reformulation of the SHNC
by Dicks in [Dic94], known as the “amalgamated graph conjecture,” which we do
not discuss here.
      By a bicoloured digraph, or simply a bigraph, we mean a directed graph, G,
such that each edge is coloured (or labelled) either “1” or “2.” It is also equivalent
to giving a directed graph homomorphism ν : G → B2 , where B2 is the graph with
one vertex and two self-loops, one coloured “1” and the other “2.” If, moreover, ν
is étale, we call ν or (somewhat abusively) G an étale bigraph, which means that
G is a bigraph such that no vertex has two incident edges, both incoming or both
outgoing, of the same colour.
      Given a digraph, G, recall the definition of the reduced cyclicity from equa-
tion (1.1), where conn(G) denotes the connected components of G; set
                                                              
                        ρ′ (G) = max          max 0, h1 (X) − 1 .
                                X∈conn(G)

    The HNC is equivalent to
(2.6)                          ρ′ (K ×B2 L) ≤ ρ(K)ρ(L)
for all étale bigraphs K and L; the SHNC is equivalent to
(2.7)                          ρ(K ×B2 L) ≤ ρ(K)ρ(L)
for all étale bigraphs K and L (see [How54, Imr77b, Imr77a, Ger83, Sta83,
Neu90, Dic94]). We shall work with this form of the SHNC. Again, we say the
HNC or SHNC, respectively, holds for a pair of étale bigraphs, (K, L), if equa-
tion (2.6) or (2.7), respectively, holds; and again, we say that K is universal for the
HNC or SHNC, respectively, if for any L the same conjecture holds for (K, L).
      Let us briefly explain the connection between the group theoretic formulations
of the HNC and SHNC and the graph theoretic formulations. Given generators,
g1 , g2 , for the free group, F2 , for each subgroup K ⊂ F2 , there is a canonically
associated étale bigraph, K; K is given by constructing the Schreier coset graph,
Sch(F2 , K, {g1 , g2 }), and letting K be the “core” of Sch(F2 , K, {g1 , g2 }), i.e., its
smallest subgraph containing all reduced loops based at the vertex K (see [MW02]
or the references in the previous paragraph); Sch(F2 , K, {g1 , g2 }) with directed
edges labelled either g1 or g2 is a (typically infinite degree) covering of B2 , and
K, a finite subgraph of Sch(F2 , K, {g1 , g2 }), is therefore an étale bigraph. If K, L
are subgroups of F2 , and K, L the corresponding étale bigraphs, then each compo-
nent of K ×B2 L corresponds to the graph associated to K ∩ x−1 Lx ranging over
double coset representatives, x.
      Theorem 2.1 will be proven by the following equivalent theorem.
62                     2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


Theorem 2.2. The Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture holds. That is, if
K → B2 and L → B2 are two étale bigraphs over B2 , then
(2.8)                         ρ(K ×B2 L) ≤ ρ(K)ρ(L).
    Equation (2.8) is tight in that if either K or L is a covering of B2 (i.e., has all
vertices of degree four), then the inequality is satisfied with equality.

              2.4. Galois and Covering Theory in the SHNC
    In this section develop more aspects of Galois theory, in addition to those given
in Section 1.3. This will later lead us to sheaves we call ρ-kernels. Let us now give
definitions and state the main theorems to be developed in this section.
Definition 2.3. By the Cayley bigraph on a group, G, with generators g1 and g2 ,
denoted G = Cayley(G; g1 , g2 ), we mean the étale bigraph, G, where VG = G and
EG = G × {1, 2} (as sets), such that for each g ∈ G and i = 1, 2, the edge (g, i) has
colour i, tail g, and head gi g.
     We reduce the SHNC to the special case of subgraphs of a Cayley graph, as
follows.
Theorem 2.4. To prove Theorem 2.2, the SHNC, it suffices verify the SHNC on
all pairs, (L, L′ ), such that L, L′ are subgraphs of the same Cayley bigraph. In
particular, to prove the SHNC it suffices to show that any subgraph of a Cayley
bigraph is universal for the SHNC.
    The following simplifications of the SHNC on subgraphs of Cayley graphs will
help solidify the connection between the SHNC and ρ-kernels of the next section.
Theorem 2.5. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G. Then
    (1) L is universal for the SHNC if for any étale L′ → G we have (L, L′ )
        satisfies the SHNC (with L′ inheriting the edge colouring from G, i.e.,
        from the composition L′ → G followed by G → B2 );
    (2) for any étale L′ → G we have
                              L ×B2 L′ ≃ (LG) ×G L′ ,
         where                             a
                                    LG =         Lg.
                                           g∈G

    Before giving Galois theory we quickly describe the remarkable reason for the
strong connection between the SHNC and covering and Galois theory. Since its
proof is so short, we give it here as well.
Theorem 2.6. For any covering map π : K → G of degree d, we have χ(K) =
dχ(G) and ρ(K) = dρ(G).
    Proof. The claim on χ follows since d = |VK |/|VG | = |EK |/|EG |. To show the
claim on ρ, it suffices to consider the case of G connected, the general case obtained
by summing over connected components; but similarly it suffices to consider the
case of K connected. In this case
                                                                  
         ρ(G) = h1 (G) − 1 = −χ(G) = −dχ(K) = d h1 (K) − 1 = dρ(K).
                                                                                     
                 2.4. GALOIS AND COVERING THEORY IN THE SHNC                       63


                                          e → K and L
     From this theorem it follows that if K            e → L are covering maps of
étale bigraphs, then
                                                                         
         ρ(K      e − ρ(K)ρ(
           e ×B2 L)     e L)  e = [Ke : K] [L
                                            e : L] ρ(K ×B2 L) − ρ(K)ρ(L) ;
                                    e L)
hence (K, L) satisfy the SHNC iff (K, e do. This means that to study the SHNC,
one can always pass to covers of the bigraphs of interest.
    For the rest of this section we describe a number of aspects of what we call
Galois graph theory and use it for prove Theorems 2.4 and 2.5.
     2.4.1. Galois Theory of Graphs. Here we further develop the Galois the-
ory of graphs discussed in Section 1.3. We remind the reader that in this article
Galois group actions, when written multiplicatively (i.e., not viewed as functions or
morphisms) will be written on the right, since our Cayley graphs are written with
its generators acting on the left.
     The following fact is an analogue of a standard and surprisingly useful fact in
descent theory (as in [Del77]); it is also surprisingly useful for the SHNC, despite
the fact that it is trivial.
Theorem 2.7. Let π : K → G be Galois. Then
                                       a
                        K ×G K =                      Kσ
                                         σ∈Aut(K/G)

where Kσ is the subgraph of K ×G K given via
                     VKσ = {(v, vg) | v ∈ VK , g ∈ Aut(K/G)},
                  EKσ = {(e, eg) | e ∈ EK , g ∈ Aut(K/G)}.
Each Kσ is isomorphic to K.
    (See [Fri93], and compare with the identical formula for fields in [Del77],
Section I.5.1).
Corollary 2.8. In Theorem 2.7, let us further assume that we have morphisms
K1 → K and K2 → K. Then
                                   a
                   K1 ×G K2 ≃              K1 ×K (K2 σ).
                                    σ∈Aut(K/G)

    Proof.
      K1 ×G K2 ≃ (K1 ×K K) ×G (K ×K K2 ) ≃ K1 ×K (K ×G K) ×K K2
                a                  a                 
              ≃     K1 ×K Kσ ×K K2 ≃      K1 ×K (K2 σ) .
                     σ                           σ
                                                                                   
    There are many extensions to this basic theory. We mention one interesting
example.
    Assume, for simplicity, that G is connected. If K → G is Galois and factors
as K → K ′ → G, then K → K ′ is Galois, with Galois group being the subgroup
of Aut(K/G) fixing any vertex or edge fiber of K → K ′ ; hence Aut(K/K ′ ) is a
subgroup of Aut(K/G). Conversely, a subgroup of Aut(K/G) divides the vertices
and edges of K into orbits, giving a graph K ′ (whose vertices and edges are these
orbits) and a factorization K → K ′ → G. Furthermore, for an intermediate cover
64                     2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


K → K ′ → G, K → K ′ is always Galois (since Aut(K/K ′ ) has the right cardinal-
ity), and K ′ → G is Galois iff the subgroup of Aut(K/G) fixing K → K ′ fibers is
a normal subgroup of Aut(K/G). See [ST96] for details.
     If K → G is Galois and factors as K → K ′ → G,
                                            a
(2.9)                 K ×G K ′ =                      Kg ,
                                     g∈Aut(K/G)/Aut(K/K ′ )

where
               VKg = {(v, [v]g) | v ∈ VK }, EKg = {(e, [e]g) | e ∈ EK },
where [v], [e] respectively denote the images of v, e, respectively, in K ′ ; each Kg is
isomorphic to K. Special cases of this statement include the trivial case K ′ = G
and the case K ′ = K stated earlier.
    2.4.2. Base Change. There are a number of easy “stability under base change”
results; these say that in a digram arising from arbitrary digraph morphisms L → B
and M → B,
                                   L ×B M ✲ M

                                     ❄           ❄
                                    L       ✲ B
if L → B has a certain property, then so does L ×B M → M . Just from the
construction of the fibre product, we easily see that the following classes of mor-
phisms are stable under base change: étale morphisms, covering morphism, and
Galois morphisms (and many others that we won’t need, such as open inclusions,
morphisms that are d–to–1 for some fixed d, etc.).
    2.4.3. Etale Factorization. In this subsection we shall prove that any étale
map factorizes as an open inclusion followed by a covering map. This will easily
establish Theorem 2.4.
    We define an open inclusion to be any inclusion H → G of a subgraph, H, in a
graph, G. We say the inclusion is dense if VH = VG ; this agrees with the topological
notion, i.e., the closure of G in H is H, under the topological view of G in [Fri11b].
Lemma 2.9. Let π : G → B be an étale map. Then π factors as an open inclusion,
ι : G → G′ , followed by a covering map, π ′ : G′ → B. If the vertex fibres of π (i.e.,
π −1 (v) over all v ∈ VB ) are all of the same size, i.e., πV : VG → VB is d-to-1 for
some d, then we may assume ι is dense; if in addition G is connected, then we may
assume G′ is connected.
     A variant of the first sentence of this theorem is called Marshall Hall’s theorem
in [Sta83].
     Proof. By adding isolated vertices to G we may assume πV is d-to-1 for some
d. Extend G to G′ and π to π ′ : G′ → B by completing each π −1 (e) to a perfect
bipartite matching of the vertices over the tail of e and those over the head of e
(for a self-loop we view these two sets of vertices as disjoint). Clearly π ′ : G′ → B
is a covering map. If πV was originally d-to-1 for some d, then G′ is obtained by
adding only edges, so G is dense in G′ ; if furthermore G is connected, then the G′
obtained by adding only edges is, of course, still connected.                        
     Here is an easy, but vital, observation.
                                     2.5. ρ-KERNELS                                    65


Lemma 2.10. If S → B2 is a Galois map with Galois group, G, then S is isomor-
phic to a Cayley bigraph on the group G = Gal(S/B2 ).
     Proof. Choose any v0 ∈ VS to be the “origin.” The association g 7→ v0 g sets
up an identification of G with V , by definition of a Galois covering map, since there
is a unique vertex of B2 and hence a singe vertex fibre in S. Since S → B2 is a
covering map, the vertex v0 is the tail of a unique colour 1 edge, e, whose head is
v0 g1 for a unique g1 ∈ G. For any g we have eg has tail v0 g and head v0 g1 g. It
follows that identifying V with G means that there is an edge (g, g1 g) (i.e., whose
tail is g and head is g1 g) of colour 1 for each g ∈ G. Similarly for edges of colour 2,
and this sets up an isomorphism between S and Cayley(G; g1 , g2 ).                    

     Proof (of Theorem 2.4). Let G → B2 and K → B2 be étale maps. Let
these étale maps factor as open inclusions followed by covering maps as G → G    e→B
and K → K    e → B. Let S be a Galois cover of G             e Consider G = G × e S,
                                                       e ×B K.              ′
                                                                                     G
which admits a natural map to G (namely projection onto the first component),
and similarly K ′ = K ×K                              ′
                              e S. We claim that G → G is a covering map; indeed,
by stability under base change (see Subsection 2.4.2), since K     e → B2 is a covering
             e      e      e               e    e
map, so is G ×B K → G; since S → G ×B K is a covering map, so is S → G;         e hence,
                            ′                     ′
by base change so is G → G. Similarly K → K is a covering map. According
to Theorem 2.6 and the discussion below, the SHNC is satisfied at (G, K) iff it is
satisfied at (G′ , K ′ ). But G′ , K ′ are subgraphs of S, and S is a Galois cover of B2 ,
and therefore a Cayley bigraph.                                                        

    Although we shall not need it, we mention that the idea in this last proof can
be extended from G → B2 and K → B2 to an arbitrary number of étale maps,
Li → B2 , and gives the following interesting fact.
Theorem 2.11. For any étale bigraphs L1 , . . . , Lk , there are covering maps L′i →
Li and a Cayley bigraph, S, such that each L′i is a subgraph of S that is dense (i.e.,
L′i has the same vertex set as S).
   2.4.4. The Proof of Theorem 2.5. We finish this section with the proof of
Theorem 2.5.

      Proof of Theorem 2.5. Claim (1) of the theorem is a simple base change
argument: if L is a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, and L′ → B2 is any étale
bigraph, let L′′ = L′ ×B2 G. Then, by base change (see Subsection 2.4.2), L′′ → G
is étale and L′′ → L′ is a covering map. Then (L, L′ ) satisfies the SHNC iff (L, L′′ )
does. Hence L is universal for the SHNC iff (L, L′′ ) satisfies the SHNC for all étale
bigraphs, L′′ , whose colouring map factor as L′′ → G → B2 .
      Claim (2) is an immediate consequence of Corollary 2.8, with G, K, K1 , K2
respectively replaced by B2 , G, L, L′ , noting that Aut(G/B2 ) = G.
                                                                                     

                                    2.5. ρ-kernels
    In this section we introduce a collection of sheaves that are central to our proof
of the SHNC. They are called ρ-kernels. Before defining them, we motivate their
construction by showing how their study is connected to the SHNC. First we need
to set some notation on Cayley graphs.
66                      2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


     2.5.1. Sheaves on Cayley graphs. Let G = Cayley(G; g1 , g2 ) be a Cayley
bigraph on a group, G. Recall that since our generators act on the left, e.g., the
colour 1 edges are of the form (g, g1 g), the Galois group of G is G acting on the
right. Now we define a right action of G on sheaves on G. We shall state this in
slightly more general terms. This is completely straightforward and mildly tedious,
but convenient in this section and vital to Section 2.6.
Definition 2.12. We say that a group, G, acts on a digraph, G, on the right, if
associated to each g ∈ G is an isomorphism πg , of G such that πg1 g2 = πg2 πg1 for
all g1 , g2 ∈ G. We will identify g with πg if no confusion can arise. If L is a
subgraph of G, we write Lg for the image of L under g (i.e., under πg ); similarly
if P ∈ VG ∐ EG , P g denotes the image of P under g.
    Of course, if G is a Cayley bigraph on a group, G, then G acts on G on the
right.
Theorem 2.13. Let a group, G, act on a digraph, G, on the right. Then each
element of G acts naturally as a functor on sheaves, via the association g 7→ πg∗−1 ,
such that
     (1) G acts on the right, i.e., if we write F g for πg∗−1 F for any sheaf, F , on
          G, then for any g1 , g2 ∈ G we have F g1 g2 = (F g1 )g2 , and similarly with
          the sheaf F replaced by a morphism of sheaves;
     (2) for each sheaf, F , on G, any g ∈ G, and any P ∈ VG ∐ EG we have
                                   (F g)(P ) = F (P g −1 );
          and
      (3) for each subgraph L ⊂ G and field, F, we have
                                         FL g = FLg .
    In Section 2.6 it will be important to use the fact that for each g ∈ G, πg∗−1 is
a functor, i.e., it acts (compatibly) on morphisms of sheaves as well as on sheaves.
    Proof. For item (1), we recall that for any u : G′ → G, u∗ is a functor on
sheaves, and for composable morphisms of digraphs, u1 , u2 , we have (u1 u2 )∗ = u∗2 u∗1 ;
hence, since G acts on the right, for any g1 , g2 ∈ G we have
                  πg∗−1 πg∗−1 = (πg−1 πg−1 )∗ = (πg−1 g−1 )∗ = π(g
                                                                ∗
                                                                  2 g1 )
                                                                         −1
                    1    2           2    1             1    2

and so g 7→ πg∗−1 is defines an action on sheaves and morphisms of sheaves that acts
on the right.
     Item (2) follows immediately from the definition of the pullback. Item (3)
follows since for all P ∈ VG ∐ EG and L ⊂ G and g ∈ G we have
                                  (FL g)(P ) = FL (P g −1 );
but P g −1 ∈ L iff P ∈ Lg, so
                             FLg (P ) = FL (P g −1 ) = (FL g)(P ).
Hence FLg = FL g.                                                                       
     Given a sheaf, F , on G we define
                                                M
                                         FG =         F g.
                                                g∈G
                                      2.5. ρ-KERNELS                                  67


In particular, for L ⊂ G, if we set
                                             a
                                      LG =         Lg
                                             g∈G

(akin to the notation in Theorem 2.5) then
                                      FL G ≃ FLG .

    2.5.2. Kernels and the SHNC. The following theorem summarizes our ap-
proach to the SHNC.
Theorem 2.14. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G. Assume there is an
exact sequence
(2.10)                       0 → K → FL G → Fρ(L) → 0
such that m.e.(K) = 0. Then L is universal for the SHNC.
     Proof. According to Theorem 2.5, it suffices to show that for each étale
u : L′′ → G we have that (L, L′′ ) satisfies the SHNC. Tensoring equation (2.10)
with FL′′ = u! F gives
                                                         ρ(L)
(2.11)               0 → K ⊗ FL′′ → FL G ⊗ FL′′ → FL′′ → 0.
Since m.e.(K) = 0 and u : L′′ → G is étale, Theorem 1.16 and the discussion before
it implies that
                               m.e.(K ⊗ FL′′ ) = 0.
Since the maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti number, this and equation (2.11)
implies that
                                            ρ(L)
                m.e.(FL G ⊗ FL′′ ) ≤ m.e.(FL′′ ) = ρ(L)ρ(L′′ ).
But
                        FL G ⊗ FL′′ ≃ F(LG)×G L′′ ≃ FL×B2 L′′
(using equation (1.16) and Corollary 2.8), and so we have
         ρ(L ×B2 L′′ ) = m.e.(FL×B2 L′′ ) = m.e.(FL G ⊗ FL′′ ) ≤ ρ(L)ρ(L′′ ).
                                                                                       
    2.5.3. Definition and Existence of ρ-Kernels and k-th Power Kernels.
We begin with some notation to describe the kernels we introduce here and study
throughout the rest of this paper.
    Let G be a Cayley bigraph on a group, G. For any integer k ≥ 0, let Fk×G be
the set of k × |G| matrices with entries mig ∈ F indexed over i = 1, . . . , k and g ∈ G.
If M ∈ Fk×G , then we can view M as a map from FG to Fk . Then M gives rise to
a morphism of constant sheaves
                                      M : FG → Fk .
    For any L ⊂ G and g ∈ G, we have an inclusion FLg → F, which gives us an
inclusion
                             FL G → FG ≃ FG .
Thus we get a monomorphism
                                   ιLG : FL G → FG ,
68                     2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


and, for any M ∈ Fk×G , a composite morphism
                                 M ιLG : FL G → Fk .
We shall often write ι instead of ιLG , since the subscript LG can be inferred from
the source (even if two different ι’s are involved).
Definition 2.15. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G, and
let F be a field. For any integer k ≥ 0, we say that M ∈ Fk×G is L-surjective
if the map, M ιLG is surjective. If so, we that its kernel, K = KM (L, G, G), is a
k-th power kernel for (L, G, G); if, in addition, k = ρ(L), we also say that K is a
ρ-kernel for (L, G, G).
     Note that when kernels are defined in category theory, i.e., for a category with a
zero morphism, then a kernel is defined only up to (unique) isomorphism. However,
for sheaves on a graph, we can define the kernel of a morphism F1 → F2 uniquely,
as the subsheaf of F1 that is the kernel. Hence we will speak of the kernel of a
morphism, or its kernel, for convenience; when we say “a kernel” we shall mean
the category theory notion, i.e., any morphism K → F1 that is the equalizer of
F1 → F2 and the zero morphism.
     Note that we could also define k-th power kernels when M ιLG is not surjective,
as the element of the derived category (see [GM03]) as a single shift of the mapping
cone of M ιLG ; we shall not pursue this here.
     The important point to notice is that if k ≤ ρ(L), “most” matrices M ∈ Fk×G
are L-surjective. We now demonstrate this, in a rather explicit fashion.
Definition 2.16. We say that M ∈ Fk×G is totally linearly independent (or just
totally independent) if every subset G ′ of G of size k we have {mg }g∈G ′ is linearly
independent, where mg denotes the column of M corresponding to g ∈ G.
Lemma 2.17. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group G. Then
the number of vertices of L and the number of edges of either colour in L are all at
least ρ(L).
    Proof. Adding vertices and edges to a graph does not decrease its reduced
cyclicity (i.e., its ρ). So if P is an edge of colour 2, let L′ be L union all vertices
of G and all edges of colour 1. Then ρ(L′ ) ≥ ρ(L) and L′ has the same number of
edges of colour 2 as L. But if we discard the edges of colour 2 from L′ we are left
with a union of cycles, for which ρ = 0, and discarding one edge decreases ρ by at
most one (given equation (1.1)). Hence the number of edges of colour 2 in L′ is at
least ρ(L), and so the same is true of the number of colour 2 edges in L.
    Similarly L must have at least ρ(L) edges of colour 1. Finally, since each vertex
of L is the head of at most one edge of colour 1, the number of vertices is also at
least ρ(L).                                                                          

    Now we wish to describe ρ-kernels, both as a kernel of a sheaf morphism and,
alternatively, by explicitly giving their values and restrictions.
Definition 2.18. Fix a subgraph, L, of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G. Fix
an M ∈ Fk×G for an integer k ≥ 0. For a subset T ⊂ G, the T -free subspace of
ker(M ) we mean the set
              Free T = Free T (M ) = {~a ∈ ker(M ) | ∀g ∈
                                                        / T, ag = 0}.
                                    2.5. ρ-KERNELS                                    69


A free subspace of ker(M ) is a subspace that is T -free for some T ⊂ G. For
P ∈ VG ∐ EG , we set
                             GL (P ) = {g ∈ G | P ∈ Lg}.

    In the above definition, if M ∈ Fk×G is totally independent, then for all T ⊂ G
we have

(2.12)                     dim(Free T ) = max(0, |T | − k).

Lemma 2.19. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a graph G. Let
M ∈ Fk×G be totally independent, for some k ≤ ρ(L). Then

                                  M ι : FL G → (FG )k

is surjective. Furthermore, if KM denotes its kernel, then for each P ∈ VG ∐ EG
we have
                              KM (P ) = Free GL (P ) (M ),
in the notation of Definition 2.18, and the restriction maps for KM are the inclu-
sions. In particular,
                                        
                            dim KM (P ) = nP − ρ(L),
where nP = |GL (P )|. (We shall sometimes write KM as KM (L) or KM (L, G, G) to
emphasize KM ’s dependence upon L, G, and G.)

    Proof. For each g ∈ G we have FL g = FLg . Hence for each P ∈ VG ∐ EG , we
have
                                            
                                              F if P ∈ Lg
                  (FL g)(P ) = (FLg )(P ) =
                                              0 if P ∈
                                                     / Lg
Hence
                                                M
                               (FL G)(P ) ≃               F,
                                              g∈GL (P )

and the image of M ι in (FG )k at P is the span of the subcollection of the nP
columns of M corresponding to the elements of GL (P ) ⊂ G. Since G is a Cayley
bigraph, nP is either the number of vertices, edges of colour 1, or edges of colour
2 in L. By Lemma 2.17 we have nP ≥ ρ(L), and hence this subcollection of nP
vectors in M spans Fk . Hence M ι is surjective at P , and its kernel, Free GL (P ) , is
of dimension nP − k. The restriction maps on FL G are, component by component,
those of the individual FL g over all g ∈ G, and those are just inclusions; since K is
a subsheaf of FL G, we have that K inherits those restriction maps.                   

    Note that it is easy to see, even with G = Z/3Z and L consisting of five edges,
that there need not be any graph theoretic surjections LG → Gρ(L) , where Gρ(L) is
ρ(L) disjoint copies of G; so in passing from the graphs LG and Gρ(L) to the sheaves
FL G and Fρ(L) , there exists a surjection of sheaves that does not arise from any
surjection of graphs. So an added benefit of working with sheaves (aside from using
them to form kernels useful in studying the SHNC) is that sheaves give “additional
surjections” that don’t exist in graph theory.
70                     2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


                 2.6. Symmetry and Algebra of the Excess
     In this section we make some general observations about the maximum excess
of k-th power kernels. The main observation is that given (L, G, G) as usual, the
maximum excess of KM (L) for generic M ∈ Fk×G is divisible by |G|, where by
“generic” we mean for M in some subset of Fk×G that contains a nonempty, Zariski
open subset of Fk×G . Let us outline this argument.
     First, in Subsection 2.6.1, we will show that for any M ∈ Fk×G and g ∈ G we
have KM (L)g ≃ KMg (L) where M g is obtained by an appropriate action of g on the
columns of M . This means that if F is the maximal (or minimal) excess maximizer
for KM (L), then F g is isomorphic to the maximal (or, respectively, minimal) excess
maximizer for KMg (L). It may be helpful, albeit somewhat fanciful, to understand
this symmetry via two “observers” looking at the exact sequence
                                              Mι
                             0 → KM → FL G −−−→ Fk → 0,
one who examines this at P ∈ VG ∐ EG , and the other at P g, for g fixed and
P varying; for example, FL G “looks” the same to both observers, except that its
summands appear permuted from one observer to the other.
     In Subsection 2.6.2 we discuss the generic maximum excess of KM = KM (L)
with L fixed and M ∈ Fk×G variable (and G, G, k fixed). The key to this discussion
is considering what we call “dimension profiles,” which we now define.
Definition 2.20. By a dimension profile on a bigraph, G, we mean a function
                                 n : VG ∐ EG → Z≥0 .
For any such n, we set
                     X        X                              X
            χ(n) =     n(v) −   n(e);              |n| =               n(P ).
                      v∈VG         e∈EG                    P ∈VG ∐EG

Any sheaf, F , on G determines a dimension profile, dim(F ), as the function P 7→
dim(F (P )). For any dimension profile, n, of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G,
any subgraph, L ⊂ G, any field, F, and any k ≥ 0, let
                              M(n) = M(n, L, G, G, F, k)
be the set of M ∈ Fk×G for which KM = KM (L, G, G) exists (i.e., M is L-surjective)
and has a subsheaf, F , with dim(F ) = n.
     We easily see that for all n, M(n) is a constructible subset of Fk×G . Let N
be the set of n for which M(n) is generic, i.e., contains a Zariski open subset of
Fk×G ; since M(n) is constructible, it is equivalent to say that its Zariski closure is
Fk×G . The generic (in M ) value of the maximum excess of KM is the largest value
of −χ(n) among those n ∈ N ; let N ′ be the subset of n ∈ N which attain this
largest −χ(n) value. Since G is finite, for any n ∈ N there is a generic set of M such
that M g ∈ M(n) for all g ∈ G. Hence, if n ∈ N ′ is chosen with |n| at a maximum
value (or minimum value), then by the uniqueness of the maximum (or minimum)
maximizer of the excess, the symmetry KM g ≃ KMg implies that n(P ) = n(P g −1 )
for all P ∈ VG ∐ EG and g ∈ G. Hence the generic maximum excess of KM , which
equals −χ(n) for any n ∈ N ′ , is divisible by G.
     We wish to remark that the generic maximum excess is not generally attained
by all M ∈ Fk×G . For example, our approach to the SHNC is based on the fact
that the generic maximum excess of a ρ-kernel is zero, i.e., for k = ρ(L) (see
                   2.6. SYMMETRY AND ALGEBRA OF THE EXCESS                          71


Theorem 2.33). However, if M is zero in one column, but totally independent in
the others, then M will still be L-surjective provided that L has at least ρ(L) + 1
edges of each colour. (A simple example of such an L can be obtained by deleting
one edge of each colour from Cayley(Z/mZ; 1, 1) with m ≥ 2.) In such a situation,
the fact that M has a column of zeros implies that KM has FL g as a subsheaf (more
precisely, a direct summand) for some g ∈ G, and hence the maximum excess of
KM will be at least ρ(L). Hence any L that has at least ρ(L) + 1 edges of each
colour, and for which ρ(L) > 0, has a ρ-kernel of positive maximum excess. Hence
it is essential to study the maximum excess of KM with some restrictions on M ,
i.e., requiring some special properties of M ; in our case, these properties restrict
M to some generic subset of Fρ(L)×G .
    2.6.1. Symmetry of k-th Power Kernels. The point of this subsection is
to establish the following symmetry of k-th power kernels.
Theorem 2.21. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G, and
let F be an arbitrary field. Let k be an arbitrary non-negative integer and M ∈
Fk×G . Let M g be the matrix (described earlier) whose g ′ column, for g ′ ∈ G, is the
g ′ g −1 column of M . Then M is L-surjective iff M g is L-surjective, and if so then
KM (L)g ≃ KMg (L).
     Proof. We begin our discussion of symmetry with a somewhat pedantic, but
important, point. If A is a category in which finite direct sums exists, such as an
additive category, and {As }s∈S is a family of objects in the category indexed upon
a finite set, S, then their direct sum comes with projections
                                         M
                                    fr :   As → Ar
                                           s∈S

for each r ∈ S. If π : S → S is a permutation, then we have a “component permuting
map,” P = P (π), given by
                                          !
                                     M          M
                            P (π)       As =        Aπ(s) ,
                                     s∈S           s∈S

The two direct sums in this last equation are isomorphic, but not equal (e.g., the
direct sum on the right-hand-side has the projection fr′ whose target is Aπ(r) , not
to Ar , for each r ∈ G). We shall need to keep the seemingly unimportant operator
P = P (π) in mind in order to make things precise for this subsection. If A• is any
direct sum indexed on G, then we easily see P (π2 )(P (π1 )A• ) = P (π2 ◦ π1 )A• .
    Again, let F be a field, k ≥ 0 an integer, L a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G,
on a group, G, and M ∈ Fk×G that is L-surjective. We have an exact sequence.
                                    M            Mι
(2.13)                 0 −→ K −→         FL g ′ −−−→ Fk −→ 0.
                                      g′ ∈G

For a g ∈ G,   applying πg∗−1 ,   of Theorem 2.13, to this sequence gives an exact
sequence:
                                  M              πg∗−1 (M ι)
(2.14)            0 −→ Kg −→              FL g ′ g −−−−−−−→ Fk g −→ 0.
                                  g′ ∈G

We have Fg = F since F is a constant sheaf (note the we mean that the two are
equal, not merely isomorphic). Note that πg∗−1 acts on sheaves by renaming the
72                          2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


vertices of G, so it acts on M ι only by permuting sheaf inclusions FLg′′ → F for
various values of g ′′ ; in other words,
                                   πg∗−1 (M ιFL G ) = M ι′ ,
where ι′ is ι with the source FL Gg. Hence we may write equation (2.14) as
                                j    M             M ι′
(2.15)               0 −→ Kg −−−→       FL g ′ g −−−−→ Fk −→ 0,
                                         g′ ∈G

where j is an inclusion.
   Also, we have
                                 
                      M               M                   M
          P (πg−1 )     FL g ′ g  =   FL πg−1 (g ′ )g =   FL g ′ = FL G.
                      g′ ∈G              g′ ∈G                         g′ ∈G

Hence from equation (2.15) we get a sequence
              j  M             P (πg−1 )    P (πg ) M           Mι′
   0 −→ Kg −−→       FL g ′ g −−−−−−→ FL G −−−−→      FL g ′ g −−−→ Fk −→ 0,
                    g′ ∈G                                        g′ ∈G

and hence an exact sequence (since P (πg ) and P (πg−1 ) are isomorphisms)
                                P (πg−1 )◦j              Mι′ P (πg )
(2.16)             0 −→ Kg −−−−−−−−→ FL G −−−−−−−→ Fk −→ 0,
with j being the inclusion in equation (2.15). But clearly
                        M ι′ P (πg ) = M P (πg ) ιFL G = M πg ιFL G ,
where πg is viewed as operating vectors in FG sending α ∈ FG , viewed as a function
α : G → F to πg α given by
                                 g ′ 7→ α(πg (g ′ )) = α(g ′ g).
     Hence setting M g = M πg , we get a short exact sequence
                                                         Mg ι          0
(2.17)                        0 −→ Kg −→ FL G −−−−→ Fk −
                                                       →.
Hence KMg (L) is, up to isomorphism, just Kg.
    To complete the proof of the theorem, it remains to find that permutation that
brings the columns of M to those of M g. If M = {mi,g′ } give M ’s entries, then for
any w ∈ FG , the i-th component of (M g)w = M (πg w) is
                      X                   X                 X
       (M (πg w))i =     mi,g′ (πg w)g′ =     mi,g′ wg′ g =    mi,g′′ g−1 wg′′ .
                       g′ ∈G                     g′ ∈G                     g′′ ∈G

Hence the i, g ′′ entry of M g is mi,g′′ g−1 , so the g ′′ column of M g is the g ′′ g −1 of
M.                                                                                        
    We wish to make a few comments on equation (2.17) and how we derived it.
First, kernels, in category theory, are defined only up to isomorphism; this is why
we can “forget about” P (πg−1 )j in equation (2.16); it is only important to know
that this arrow gives an exact sequence there and in equation (2.17).
    Note that the two actions of g ∈ G in equation (2.17) are right G actions on
the exact sequence. To see this, first note that
                        (M g)g ′ = (M πg )πg′ = M πgg′ = M gg ′ .
                    2.6. SYMMETRY AND ALGEBRA OF THE EXCESS                             73


Then note that if we take the procedure for going from equation (2.13) to equa-
tion (2.17) and then do the same procedure with g replaced by g ′ , then we easily
see (paying close attention to the order of the P ’s, the π’s, and the ι’s) that we get
the same equation as equation (2.13) with K replaced by Kgg ′ and M replaced by
M gg ′ .
     We wish to comment on something that seems a bit contradictory. The map
g 7→ P (πg−1 ) is a left action, and so it may seem strange that our forgotten
monomorphism P (πg−1 )j in equation (2.16) involves a left action. But note that if
we apply g ′ to equation (2.17) we get
                        πg∗′ −1 (P (πg−1 )◦j)            πg∗′ −1 (M ι′ P (πg ))
          0 −→ Kgg ′ −−−−−−−−−−−−−→ FL Gg ′ −−−−−−−−−−−−→ Fk −→ 0,
and hence an exact sequence
                                            α        β
                          0 −→ Kgg ′ −−→ FL G −−→ Fk −→ 0,
where
            α   = P (πg′ −1 ) ◦ πg∗′ −1 (P (πg−1 ) ◦ j) = P (πg′ −1 )P (πg−1 )j ′ ,
            β   = πg∗′ −1 (M ι′ P (πg ))P (πg′ ),


for an inclusion j ′ . Examining α we see that P (πg′ −1 ) is applied to the left of
P (πg−1 ), whose product equals P (π(gg′ )−1 ), so that g ′ appears to the right of g.
    A similar remark applies for the column permuting rule taking M to M g:
g 7→ πg−1 is a left action, not a right action. However, if f : G → T is any function
from G to a set, T , then defining a function f g via (f g)(g ′ ) = f (g ′ g −1 ) defines a
right action of G on functions from G to T ; indeed, for f : G → T and g, g1 , g2 ∈ G
we have
                                                                                   
     (f g1 )g2 ) (g) = (f g1 )(gg2−1 ) = f (gg2−1 g1−1 ) = f g(g1 g2 )−1 = f (g1 g2 ) (g).
So the left action g 7→ πg−1 turns into a right action when it acts on the argument
of a function.
    We finish this subsection with a corollary of Theorem 2.21 that is our sole
application of the theorem.
Corollary 2.22. Let n be a dimension profile for Cayley bigraph, G, on a group,
G. Let L be a subgraph of G, let F be a field, and let k ≥ 0 be an integer. Then for
any g ∈ G, we have
                        M(ng, L, G, G, k) = M(n, L, G, G, k)g,
where ng is given by
                                     (ng)(P ) = n(P g −1 )
for all P ∈ VG ∐ EG .
    (We easily check that the action g → ng in this corollary is a right action,
similar to the above discussion of the action on functions from G to a set, T .)
   Proof. Let g ∈ G and M ∈ M(n). Then there exists an F ⊂ KM such that
dim(F ) = n. Then we have F g ⊂ KM g and we have dim(F g) = dim(F )g, since
                                                     
                       dim (F g)(P ) = dim F (P g −1 )
74                     2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


for all P ∈ VG ∐EG . But we have an isomorphism ιg : KM g → KMg of sheaves on G;
so on the one hand we have ιg F ⊂ KMg , and on the other hand, since isomorphisms
preserve the dimension profile, we have M g ∈ M(n′ ) where
                          n′ = dim(ιg F g) = dim(F g) = ng.
Hence M ∈ M(n) implies that M g ∈ M(ng). Applying this observation to M
replaced with M g and g replaced with g −1 (or simply reversing the argument in
this proof) shows the converse. Hence M(n)g = M(ng).                         
    2.6.2. Generic Maximum Excess. If F is a field and r ≥ 1 an integer, then
by a generic subset of Fr we mean a subset that contains
                       {(x1 , . . . , xr ) ∈ Fr | p(x1 , . . . , xr ) 6= 0}
for some nonzero polynomial, p. Algebraic geometry and generic subsets are most
commonly discussed (at least on the most basic level) under the assumption that
F is algebraically closed. Under this situation, all generic sets are nonempty; this
remains true if F is infinite, or if the polynomial, p, above is fixed and F is finite
but sufficiently large.
     In order to have a sensible definition of generic and to conform to the algebraic
geometric literature, we will freely assume that F is algebraically closed. However,
the theorems we obtain in this section and the next will be valid for any infinite field
or “sufficiently large” finite field, F, by applying these theorems to the algebraic
closure of F, finding the associated polynomials, p, to the generic sets of interest,
and determining how large F needs to be so that the generic sets are nonempty.
The reader may find it amusing to note that in all our discussion of generic sets
and generic conditions, all that we ultimately care about is that certain of these
generic sets are nonemtpy (e.g., that there is at least one ρ-kernel for (L, G, G) with
vanishing maximum excess).
     Let us review some notation in algebraic geometry; see [Har77], Chapter 1,
Section 1. Let us assume that F is algebraically closed. Let AN = AN (F), where
N is an integer or a set or a product thereof, denote affine N space over F, i.e.,
the set FN , with its usual Zariski topology. (When we speak of topological notions
on FN we mean those of AN (F); in the literature AN (F) connotes FN viewed as
a topological space, or scheme, etc.) Recall that a locally closed set is the inter-
section of an open and closed set (i.e., a subset of AN determined as the zeros of
some polynomials and complement of the zeros of some other polynomials), and a
constructible set on AN amounts to a finite disjoint union of locally closed sets (see
[Har77], Exercise II.3.18).
Lemma 2.23. Let F be an algebraically closed field, k ≥ 0 an integer, and L a
subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G. For each n : VG ∐ EG → Z≥0 ,
M(n) = M(n, L, G, G, k) is a constructible set.
    Proof. We introduce |n| |G| indeterminates as follows: for each P ∈ VP ∐ EP ,
and i = 1, . . . , n(P ), let xP,i be a vector of indeterminates indexed on G (there
are |n| vector variables xP,i , for a total of |n| |G| indeterminates). We note that
M ∈ M(n) precisely when one can find a solution for M and xP,i to the conditions
     (1) M is L-surjective; i.e., for each P ∈ VG ∐EG , Fk is spanned by the columns
         of M corresponding to the elements of GP (L);
     (2) for all P and i we have that xP,i has zero components outside of GL (P );
                      2.6. SYMMETRY AND ALGEBRA OF THE EXCESS                                  75


     (3) for all P and i, M xP,i = 0;
     (4) for all P , xP,1 , . . . , xP,nP are linearly independent;
     (5) for all e ∈ EG and all i we have that xe,i , xte,1 , xte,2 , . . . , xte,nte are linearly
          dependent, and similarly with he replacing te.
The dependence or independence or spanning of vectors reduces to the vanishing
or nonvanishing of determinants of the vectors’ coordinates. Hence all the above
equations give us a collection of polynomials fi ∈ F[M, x] (polynomials in the entries
of M and the xP,i ’s) and fej ∈ F[M, x] such that M ∈ M(n) iff for some x we have
(M, x) ∈ C, where C is the set of (M, x) for which fi (M, x) = 0 for all relevant i
and fej (M, x) 6= 0 for all relevant j; hence C is constructible. But M ∈ M(n) iff
(M, x) ∈ C for some x; hence M(n) is the image of C under the projection
                                  Ak×G × A|n|×G → Ak×G .
But any projection from an affine space to another by omitting some of the co-
ordinates has the property that it takes constructible sets to constructible sets
(see Exercise II.3.19 of [Har77] or Theorem 3.16 of [Har92], noting that such a
projection is both regular and of finite type). Hence M(n), the image of C, is
constructible.                                                                 
     We recall that a generic subset, S, of some affine space, FT , is a subset that
contains a nonemtpy Zariski open subset of the space; if S is constructible, then S
is generic iff its Zariski closure is the affine space.
     Next we claim that M(n) is generic in Fk×G for at least one n, provided that
k ≤ ρ(L), and that M(n) = ∅ for all but finitely many n. Indeed, for any totally
independent M ∈ Fk×G we have that M is L-surjective (for (L, G, G, F, k)), and
the zero sheaf, Z, has dim(Z) = 0. Hence the Zariski closure of M(0) is Fk×G .
Furthermore, KM (P ), for any P ∈ VG ∐ EG , is of dimension at most |G| − k; hence
M(n) = ∅ unless |n(P )| ≤ |G| − k for all P ∈ VG ∐ EG , and there are only finitely
many such n.
Definition 2.24. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G, and
let F be an algebraically closed field. Let k ≤ ρ(L) be a non-negative integer. We
say that n : VG ∐ EG → Z≥0 is generic for (L, G, G, F, k) if the Zariski closure of
M(n) is Ak×G (F). We define the generic maximum excess of (L, G, G, F, k) to be
the largest value of −χ(n) for which n is generic. We define n to be a maximal
profile (respectively, minimal profile) of (L, G, G, F, k) if n is generic, −χ(n) equals
the generic maximum excess, and there is no n′ 6= n which is generic with −χ(n′ ) =
−χ(n) and n′ (P ) ≥ n(P ) (respectively n′ (P ) ≤ n(P )) for all P ∈ VG ∐ EG .
Theorem 2.25. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G. Let F
be an algebraically closed field, and k ≤ ρ(L) an integer. There is a unique maximal
profile and a unique minimal profile for (L, G, G, F, k). Furthermore, if n is either
the maximal or minimal profile, and P ∈ VG ∐ EG , then ng = n for all g ∈ G (in
the notion of Corollary 2.22). In particular −χ(n) is divisible by |G|.
    Actually, the proof below shows that the theorem is still true when k > ρ(L),
provided that L has at least k edges of each colour, so that a totally independent
M ∈ Fk×G is L-surjective.
    Proof. Let n1 , n2 be two maximal profiles for (L, G, G, F, k). Let us show that
n1 = n2 . Consider the subset, S, of Fk×G , M , such that M ∈ M(ni ) for i = 1, 2
76                     2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


and m.e.(KM ) = −χ(n1 ) = −χ(n2 ). Clearly
                                                  \
                  S = M(n1 ) ∩ M(n2 ) ∩                          M(n),
                                          n s.t. −χ(n)>−χ(n1 )

where M(n) denotes the complement of M(n). But if −χ(n) > −χ(n1 ) then, by
assumption, n is not generic, and hence S is the intersection of a finite number
of generic subsets of Fk×G ; hence S is a generic subset of Fk×G , as well. But any
element, M ∈ S, has subsheaves F1 , F2 , of KM which obtain the maximum excess
of KM and with dim(Fi ) = ni for i = 1, 2. But then F = F1 + F2 also achieves the
maximum excess and has deg(F ) ≥ ni for i = 1, 2. Hence
                                        [
                        S⊂                           M(n),
                             n s.t. −χ(n)=−χ(n1 ), n≥N

where N = max(n1 , n2 ). Since the union on the right-hand-side is a finite union
of constructible sets, the closure of one of these sets is Fk×G . Hence there is an
n with −χ(n) = −χ(n1 ) and n ≥ N = max(n1 , n2 ) such that n is generic; but if
n1 6= n2 , then n does not equal either of them and is at least as big as either, which
contradicts the maximality of the ni , i = 1, 2. Hence n1 = n2 , and the maximal
profile is unique.
     We argue similarly for the minimal profile, replacing F1 + F2 with F1 ∩ F2 .
     Let n be the maximal profile for (L, G, G, F, k) (now known to be unique). Since
M(n) is a generic subset of Fk×G , so is M(ng) = M(n)g for any g ∈ G. But then
ng is also a maximal profile, since clearly χ(n) = χ(ng) and |n| = |ng|. Hence
n = ng for all g ∈ G. The same is true of the minimal profile.
     It follows that the maximal (or minimal) profile, n, is invariant under G, and
hence has the same value on all the vertices, on all the edges of colour 1, and
on all the edges of colour 2. Hence −χ(n) is divisible by |G| for the maximal (or
minimal) profile, and hence the generic maximum excess of (L, G, G, F, k) is divisible
by |G|.                                                                              

                    2.7. Variability of k-th Power Kernels
     The main goal of this section is to prove the following theorem.
Theorem 2.26. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group G. Let
F be an algebraically closed field, and let k ≤ ρ(L) be a positive integer. Then the
generic maximum excess of (L, G, G, F, k) is at most that of (L, G, G, F, k − 1), and
we have equality iff both excesses are zero.
     As a consequence we get the following theorem.
Theorem 2.27. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group G. Let
F be an algebraically closed field, and let k ≤ ρ(L) be a positive integer. Let L′ be
obtained from L by removing a single edge. Then the generic maximum excess of
(L′ , G, G, F, k − 1) is at least that of (L, G, G, F, k).
    (As before, this theorem is also true if k > ρ(L), provided that L has at least
k edges of each colour, so that a totally independent M ∈ Fk×G is L-surjective.)
    A second goal of this section is to establish some general relations between
kernels K = KM (L) as M and L vary. We shall derive two interesting, short exact
sequences. First we establish a short exact sequence
(2.18)                   0 → KM (L) → KM ′ (L) → F → 0,
                     2.7. VARIABILITY OF k-TH POWER KERNELS                          77


for any M ∈ Fk×G and M ′ obtained from M by deleting the last row. Second we
establish a short exact sequence
(2.19)                   0 → KM ′ (L′ ) → KM ′ (L) → E → 0,

with L, L′ as in Theorem 2.27, M ′ ∈ F(k−1)×G such that KM ′ (L′ ) exists (i.e., M ′ is
L′ -surjective), and E a sheaf with E(V ) = 0 and E(E) of dimension |G|.
     Equation (2.19) will be used along with Theorem 2.25 to show that Theo-
rem 2.26 implies Theorem 2.27.
     Theorem 2.26 will not be proven with short exact sequences, but rather with a
careful analysis of the unique minimal maximizer of the excess of KM (L) and of that
of KM ′ (L). The sequence in equation (2.18) gives a relationship between KM (L)
and KM ′ (L), but we don’t know how to directly use this to conclude anything
interesting about the two sheaves, such as the result of Theorem 2.26.
     At this point we will divide our discussion into subsections. In Subsection 2.7.1,
we will discuss the exact sequences related to our proof. In Subsection 2.7.2 we give
the main observation of how the maximum excess changes in passing to subsheaves,
and give an intuitive reason why the generic maximum excess of KM ′ (L), as above,
should be strictly greater than that of KM (L) provided that these numbers don’t
both vanish. In Subsection 2.7.3 we mimic the notation of Section 2.6 to include a
discussion of KM ′ (L) as above and make our arguments precise, finishing the proof
of Theorem 2.26; this will easily yield Theorem 2.27.

    2.7.1. Variability as Exact Sequences. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley
bigraph, G, on a group, G. For any non-negative integer, k ≤ ρ(L), we have that a
generic M ∈ Fk×G gives rise to a short exact sequence

(2.20)                     0 → KM (L) → FL G → Fk → 0.
First we considering the variance of this equation in M ; in other words, fix an
M ∈ Fk×G such that
                                   M ι : FL G → Fk
is surjective. Then we have an exact sequence given in equation (2.20); if M ′ ∈
F(k−1)×G is M with its last row deleted, we have a similar exact sequence

(2.21)                   0 → KM ′ (L) → FL G → Fk−1 → 0.
Notice that this discussion and everything below will remain essentially the same
if, more generally, M ′ is taken to be M followed by any surjective map Fk → Fk−1 .
In any event, we get a digram:
                                                Mι ✲
             0       ✲ KM (L)        ✲ F G
                                          L              Fk         ✲ 0

                                          ≃
                                                           ❄
                          ❄              ❄      M ′ ι✲
             0       ✲ KM ′ (L)      ✲ F G
                                        L                Fk−1       ✲ 0

where the dotted arrow from KM ′ (L) to KM (L) is inferred from the solid arrows;
furthermore, given that the solid horizontal arrows consist of an isomorphism and
epimorphism, we infer that the dotted arrow is a monomorphism. We then complete
78                    2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


the diagram to obtain a diagram
                                                         0

                                                         ❄
                          0              0               F

                        ❄                ❄               ❄
                                               Mι ✲
             0      ✲ KM (L)         ✲ FL G             Fk      ✲ 0

                                                          ❄
                         ❄               ❄     M ′ ι✲
             0      ✲ KM ′ (L)       ✲ F G
                                         L              Fk−1    ✲ 0

                           ❄              ❄               ❄
                   KM ′ (L)/KM (L)       0               0

                           ❄
                          0
A simple diagram chase shows that the nonzero upper right sheaf, F, and the
nonzero lower left sheaf, KM ′ (L)/KM (L), are isomorphic. Hence we obtain the
short exact sequence in equation (2.18).
     An analogous exact sequence can be obtained by varying L in equation (2.20).
Let L′ ⊂ L be a subgraph of L. Fix an M ∈ Fk×G that induces a surjection
FL′ G → Fk . Then we get a diagram:
             0      ✲ KM (L′ )       ✲ F ′G         ✲ Fk        ✲ 0
                                        L


                                                        ≃
                        ❄                ❄             ❄
             0      ✲ KM (L)         ✲ F G          ✲ Fk        ✲ 0
                                         L

Since FL′ G → FL G is an injection, and the last vertical arrow is an isomorphism,
the inferred dotted arrow is an injection. We therefore add a bottom row to the
diagram and infer from the 3 × 3 Lemma that
                         KM (L)/KM (L′ ) ≃ (FL /FL′ )G.
In particular, if L′ is obtained from L by removing m edges, then we infer equa-
tion (2.19) (with M here replaced by M ′ , and k implicit here replaced by k − 1),
where E is a sheaf with E(V ) = 0 and E(E) being of dimension m|G|.

    2.7.2. Maximum Excess and Subsheaves. The goal of this section is to
explain the main idea we will use to prove Theorem 2.26; the formal proof will be
given in the subsection after this one.
    The following theorem gives a number of ways of demonstrating whether or not
a sheaf and one of its subsheaves have the same maximum excess.
Theorem 2.28. Let F ′ ⊂ F be sheaves on a digraph, G. Let U ⊂ F (V ) be
the minimal maximizer of the excess of F , and let U ′ ⊂ F ′ (V ) be the minimal
maximizer of the excess of F ′ . Then
(2.22)                         m.e.(F ′ ) ≤ m.e.(F ),
                     2.7. VARIABILITY OF k-TH POWER KERNELS                           79


with equality iff U = U ′ and
                                Γht (F , U ′ ) = Γht (F ′ , U ′ ).
    We already know equation (2.22) is true, since the maximum excess is a quasi-
Betti number; the novelty of this theorem is that we have a simple condition to
characterize when equality holds.
    Proof. Since U ′ ⊂ F (V ) and
                                Γht (F ′ , U ′ ) ⊂ Γht (F , U ′ ),
we have that
               m.e.(F ′ ) = excess(F ′ , U ′ ) ≤ excess(F , U ′ ) ≤ m.e.(F );
hence equality holds in equation (2.22) iff
                     excess(F ′ , U ′ ) = excess(F , U ′ ) = m.e.(F ).
The first equality holds iff
                                Γht (F , U ′ ) = Γht (F ′ , U ′ ).
The second equality holds iff U ′ is also a maximizer for F . But since U is the
minimal maximizer for F , this implies that U ⊂ U ′ ; but this means that U ⊂ U ′ ⊂
F ′ (V ), so U is a maximizer for F ′ , and hence U ′ ⊂ U (since U ′ is the minimal
maximizer for F ′ ). Hence U = U ′ .                                              
    Theorem 2.28 gives us a number of ways to conclude that equation (2.22) holds
with strict inequality in certain situations. For example, consider a subgraph, L,
of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G, and consider a value, k for which
                                              
                                  m.e. KM (L) > 0
for a generic M ∈ Fk×G . Let M ′ be obtained from M by removing its bottom row,
and consider the minimal maximizer, U = U (M ′ ) ⊂ KM ′ (L)(V ) of the excess of
KM ′ (L). We have that KM ⊂ KM ′ , and hence
                                                    
                          m.e. KM (L) = m.e. KM ′ (L)
implies that U (M ′ ), which is generically nonzero, lies entirely in KM (L)(V ). But if
w ∈ KM ′ (L)(V ) is any nonzero vector supported on v ∈ VG , then we may identify
w with the corresponding element of KM ′ (L)(v), and so
                                                 M
                              w ∈ (FL G)(v) ≃           Fg ,
                                                     g∈GL (v)

where Fg denotes a copy of F. In other words, w is given by its G components,
which are (zero outside of GL (v) and are) elements of F. Hence, if we add a generic
extra row to M ′ on the bottom, to form M , the row, m~ = (mg )g∈G will (generically
in m)
   ~ satisfy
                                   X
(2.23)                                 wg mg 6= 0.
                                       g∈G

Hence w ∈/ KM (L)(V ) generically, and therefore the minimal maximizers for KM (L)
and KM ′ (L) will generically be different. Hence, by Theorem 2.28, we have
                                                         
                         m.e. KM ′ (L) ≥ 1 + m.e. KM (L)
80                     2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


for generic M (and M ′ obtained from M by deleting its bottom row). This argument
will establish Theorem 2.26; all we need to do is to make this rigourous.

    2.7.3. Proof of Theorems 2.26 and 2.27. In this subsection we precisely
state the idea in the last subsection as Theorem 2.30 and use it to prove Theo-
rem 2.26. We then easily conclude Theorem 2.27.
    Let F be a field, G a group, and k ≥ 1 an integer. If M ′ ∈ F(k−1)×G and
~ ∈ FG , we define merge(M ′ , m)
m                              ~ to be the element of Fk×G whose first k − 1 rows
             ′
consist of M and whose k-th row consists of m.~
Definition 2.29. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G. Let
F be an algebraically closed field. Let M ′ ∈ F(k−1)×G be a matrix, for some integer
k ≥ 1, that is L-surjective and whose kernel, KM ′ (L), has nonzero maximum excess.
Define the redundancy of M ′ , denoted redund(M ′ ), to be the subset of FG consisting
   ~ such that M = merge(M ′ , m)
of m                              ~ is L-surjective, and such that
                                                         
                            m.e. KM ′ (L) = m.e. KM (L) .
Theorem 2.30. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G. Let
F be an algebraically closed field and k a positive integer. Let M ′ ∈ F(k−1)×G be
a matrix that is L-surjective, and whose kernel, KM ′ (L), has nonzero maximum
excess. Then the redundancy of M ′ lies in a proper subspace of FG .
    Proof. This follows the argument of the last subsection. If U is the minimal
maximizer of KM ′ (L), then U is nonzero because the maximum excess is nonzero.
Hence there exists a w ∈ U supported at v ∈ VG with w 6= 0. So if merge(M ′ , m)~
is L-surjective, we have w ∈ / KM (L) if equation (2.23) holds. Since w 6= 0, equa-
                          ~ outside of a proper subspace of FG .
tion (2.23) holds for all m                                                      
     Proof of Theorem 2.26. If the generic maximum excesses were equal, then
for a nonempty Zariski open subset, U , of Fk×G , we would have for all M ∈ U the
maximum excess of KM (L) is the same as that of KM ′ (L), where M ′ is obtained
from M by discarding its bottom row. Since U is nonempty and Zariski open, we
have a polynomial, p = p(M ′ , m)
                               ~ such that
                                    p(M ′ , m)
                                            ~ 6= 0
implies that (M ′ , m)
                    ~ ∈ U . Write
                                           X
                            p(M ′ , m)
                                    ~ =           qn (M ′ )m
                                                           ~ n,
                                          n∈ZG
                                             ≥0


and fix any n such that qn 6= 0. Then qn (M ′ ) 6= 0 for all M ′ ∈ U ′ for a nonempty
Zariski open subset, U ′ , of F(k−1)×G . For any fixed M ′ ∈ U ′ we have p(M ′ , m)
                                                                                 ~ is a
nonzero polynomial in m; ~ hence for fixed M ′ ∈ U ′ we have that (M ′ , m)
                                                                          ~ ∈ U for a
Zariski open subset of m ~ in FG .
    On the other hand, assuming that the maximum excesses in Theorem 2.26
are not both zero, the generic maximum excess of (L, G, G, F, k − 1) is positive.
Hence KM ′ (L) has positive maximum excess for all M ′ in some nonempty, Zariski
open subset, U ′′ , of F(k−1)×G . But by Theorem 2.30, for any M ′ ∈ U ′′ we have
that (M ′ , m)
            ~ ∈/ U for m~ outside of a proper subspace of FG . But U ′ and U ′′ must
intersect (being two nonempty, Zariski open subsets of an irreducible variety), which
gives a contradiction.                                                               
                                2.8. PROOF OF THE SHNC                                   81


     Proof of Theorem 2.27. Let the generic maximum excess of (L, G, G, F, k)
be mk , that of (L, G, G, F, k − 1) be mk−1 , and that of (L′ , G, G, F, k − 1) be m′k−1 .
Since k ≤ ρ(L) and hence k − 1 ≤ ρ(L′ ) (we can see ρ(L′ ) ≥ ρ(L) − 1 from
equation (1.1)), we have that mk , mk−1 , m′k−1 are all multiples of |G|. The theorem
is immediate if mk = 0, so we may assume mk > 0. In this case Theorem 2.26
implies that mk−1 > mk , and since these numbers are both multiples of |G|, we
have
(2.24)                              mk−1 ≥ mk + |G|.
But the exact sequence in equation (2.19) shows that for any M ′ ∈ F(k−1)×G we
have
                                                   
(2.25)               m.e. KM ′ (L′ ) ≥ m.e. KM ′ (L) − |G|.
Let U, U ′ , respectively, are the subsets of M ′ ∈ F(k−1)×G at which KM ′ (L), KM ′ (L′ ),
respectively, attain their generic value; hence U, U ′ are generic, and therefore so is
U ∩ U ′ . Then applying equation (2.25) to any M ′ ∈ U ∩ U ′ implies that
                                  m′k−1 ≥ mk−1 − |G|.
Combining this with equation (2.24) gives m′k−1 ≥ mk , which proves the theorem.
                                                                              

                              2.8. Proof of the SHNC
    In this section we prove the SHNC. At this point we have all the tools we need,
except for one small detail.
Lemma 2.31. Let L be an arbitrary étale bigraph with ρ(L) > 0. Then there
exists an edge, e ∈ EL , such that the graph, L′ , obtained by removing e from L has
ρ(L′ ) = ρ(L) − 1.
    Proof. For each F ∈ EL let LF denote the subgraph of L obtained by re-
moving the edges in F from L. It is easy to see that for each e ∈ EL we have
that ρ(L{e} ) is either ρ(L) or ρ(L) − 1; this can be seen from equation (1.1), since
removing e from its connected component of L leaves h1 the same or reduces it by
one; alternatively, we can see this from the exact sequence
                           0 → FL{e} → FL → FL/L{e} → 0,
using the fact that L/L{e} is (edge supported and) of maximum excess one.
    For any two subgraphs, L′ , L′′ , of L we have an exact sequence
                      0 → FL′ ∩L′′ → FL′ ⊕ FL′′ → FL′ ∪L′′ → 0.
Hence
                        ρ(L′ ∩ L′′ ) ≥ ρ(L′ ) + ρ(L′′ ) − ρ(L′ ∪ L′′ ).
Taking F ′ , F ′′ to be disjoint subsets of EL , we see that if ρ(LF ′ ) = ρ(LF ′′ ) = ρ(L),
then setting L′ = LF ′ , L′′ = LF ′′ yields
                                   ρ(LF ′ ∪F ′′ ) ≥ ρ(L),
and so ρ(LF ′ ∪F ′′ ) = ρ(L). Hence, if ρ(LF ) = ρ(L) for all F ⊂ EL of size one, then
by induction we can show this holds for F ⊂ EL of any size, which is impossible
(since removing all the edges of a graph leaves it with ρ = 0). Hence there is at
least one e ∈ EL for which ρ(L{e} ) = ρ(L) − 1.                                      
82                    2. THE HANNA NEUMANN CONJECTURE


    Of course, one can give a purely graph theoretic proof of Lemma 2.31; we now
sketch such a proof. From equation (1.1), it suffices to show that if L is connected
with h1 (L) ≥ 2 then we can remove an edge from L and reduce h1 by one. We
claim that it suffices to take any edge that remains after we repeatedly prune the
leaves of L.
Definition 2.32. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G on a group, G. Let F
be an algebraically closed field. Then by the generic maximum excess of the ρ-kernel
of type (L, G, G, F) we mean the generic maximum excess of (L, G, G, F, ρ(L)).
Theorem 2.33. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G on a group, G. Let F
be an algebraically closed field. Then the generic maximum excess of the ρ-kernel
of type (L, G, G) is zero.
    Proof. Fix G and G and let us prove the theorem for all L by induction on
ρ(L). The base case ρ(L) = 0 follows by definition, since the exact sequence
                             0 → K → FL G → F0 → 0
implies                                        X
                      m.e.(K) ≤ m.e.(FL G) =         ρ(Lg) = 0
                                               g∈G
(since ρ(Lg) = ρ(L) = 0 for all g ∈ G). The inductive step of our induction on ρ(L)
is immediate from Theorem 2.27 applied to any L′ obtained from L by removing
a single edge so that ρ(L′ ) = ρ(L) − 1; the existence of such an L′ is given by
Lemma 2.31.                                                                      
    Proof of Theorem 2.1, the SHNC. By the graph theoretic reformulation
of the SHNC, it suffices to show Theorem 2.2. By Theorem 2.4 it suffices to show
that any subgraph, L, of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G, is universal for the
SHNC. But by Theorem 2.33, there exists a ρ-kernel, K = KM (L) for (L, G, G, F)
with vanishing maximum excess, for any algebraically closed F. Hence we apply
Theorem 2.14 to conclude that L is universal for the SHNC.                     

                          2.9. Concluding Remarks
     We finish this paper with a few concluding remarks.
     In this chapter we have made no explicit reference to homology theories. In
[Fri11b] we have used the twisted homology to prove that the maximum excess
is a first quasi-Betti number; hence the theorems in this paper ostensibly rely on
homology theories. However, we think it quite possible that one may able to prove
that the maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti number directly, or give a direct
proof of the inequalities we made use of in this paper. For example, if F ′ → F is
a monomorphism, then since the maximum excess is a first quasi-Betti number we
know that
                                m.e.(F ′ ) ≤ m.e.(F ).
But this inequality is clear from the subsheaf formulation of maximum excess in
Theorem 1.28.
     We remark that we first proved the SHNC using twisted homology theory, and
then rewrote our proofs to use only maximum excess. In fact, twisted homology
theory offers some additional intuition regarding the maximum excess. Twisted
homology theory shows that (after pulling back appropriately, see [Fri11b]), the
                             2.9. CONCLUDING REMARKS                                 83


maximum excess can be interpreted as the dimension of a certain vector space of
“twisted harmonic one-forms” of the sheaf. When this dimension is d > 0, one can
impose d′ linear conditions on the twisted harmonic one-forms and still have a d−d′
dimensional space of one-forms. This is how we view the variance in L of KM ′ (L),
as in the exact sequence of equation (2.19): to take a space of one-forms on KM ′ (L)
and obtain a one-form in KM ′ (L′ ), one has to impose |G| |EL \ EL′ | conditions on
the one-forms, namely the conditions that they vanish on the edges in LG that do
not lie in L′ G. Of course, one has to pullback by an appropriate covering map to
make this rigourous (see [Fri11b]), but all the edge counts and dimension counts
scale appropriately under any covering.
     The k-th power kernels in this paper are subsheaves of the constant sheaf FG ≃
FG . We believe that subsheaves of constant sheaves satisfy some stronger properties
than general sheaves, regarding their homological invariants and maximum excess.
It would nice to study this further.
     Finally, we give a variant of our proof of the SHNC that involves no homology
theory and, in particular, avoids any use of Theorem 1.10. As before, let L be
any subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G, and let F be a field. First
note that using Appendix A, we can show that if there is a ρ-kernel for (L, G, G)
with vanishing maximum excess, then the SHNC holds for all pairs (L, L′ ), with
L′ any subgraph of G; Appendix A makes no use of homology or Theorem 1.10.
(Appendix A is a bit tedious and long, however avoids use of applying Theorem 1.16
with α1 being the maximum excess, and the proof that the maximum excess is a
scaling first quasi-Betti number used Theorem 1.10.) Furthermore, if the generic
maximum excess of (L, G, G, F, ρ(L)) were greater than zero, then it would be at
least |G|. Then, by induction, for n = 1, . . . , ρ(L) we have that the generic maximum
excess of (L, G, G, F, ρ(L)−n) would be at least |G|(1+n), in view of Theorems 2.25
and 2.26 (which makes no use of homology or Theorem 1.10). But this is impossible
for n = ρ(L), since the generic maximum excess of (L, G, G, F, 0) is |G|ρ(L), because
a 0-th power kernel is plainly just FL G, which has maximum excess ρ(L)|G|. Hence
the SHNC holds for all pairs of subgraphs of Cayley bigraphs, and hence holds for
all pairs of étale bigraphs, by Theorem 2.4.
                                   APPENDIX A


                    A Direct View of ρ-Kernels

    In this appendix we give a direct combinatorial proof that the SHNC follows
the vanishing maximum excess of some ρ-kernel for each triple (L, G, G).
    In this section we give a direct proof that the vanishing generic maximum
excess of ρ-kernels for all subgraphs, L, of any Cayley graph, G, implies the SHNC.
We shall not use exact sequences. We shall require a few definitions, and some
calculations to follow. While this gives some extra intuition about ρ-kernels, this
section is not essential to the proof of the SHNC; we shall omit some of the easy
but tedious graph theoretic details.
Definition A.1. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G. As
usual, for P ∈ VG ∐ EG , let GL (P ) be the set of g ∈ G such that Lg contains P . By
a vertex family on (L, G, G) we mean a function, U, from VG to P(G), the power set
(i.e., set of subsets) of G, such that for all v ∈ VG we have U(v) ⊂ GL (v). Similarly,
an edge family on (L, G, G) is a function W : EG → P(G) such that W(e) ⊂ GL (e)
for all e ∈ EG . A vertex family, U, and edge family, W, are compatible if for all
e ∈ EG we have W(e) ⊂ U(te) ∩ U(he). Given a vertex family, U, the induced edge
family, UE , of U is the edge family UE given by
                          UE (e) = U(te) ∩ U(he) ∩ GL (e).
    The following lemmas motivate the above definitions; we omit their proofs,
which are almost immediate.
Lemma A.2. To each vertex family, U on (L, G, G), and compatible edge family,
W, on (L, G, G), there is a subgraph H ⊂ L ×B2 G determined via
          VH = {(vg −1 , v) | g ∈ U(v)},        EH = {(eg −1 , e) | g ∈ W(e)};
conversely, any subgraph H ⊂ L ×B2 G arises from a unique vertex family, U, and
compatible edge family, W.
Lemma A.3. For any vertex family, U, on (L, G, G) and compatible edge family,
W, we have
                                  W(e) ⊂ UE (e).
In other words, UE is the “largest” edge family compatible with U.
Definition A.4. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley bigraph, G, on a group, G, let
M ∈ Fρ(L)×G be totally linearly independent, and let K = KM be the resulting
ρ-kernel. By a straight subspace of K(V ) we mean a subspace
                                   X
                             U=        U (v) ∈ K(V ),
                                    v∈VG

such that for each v ∈ VG , we have
(A.1)                              U (v) = FreeU (v)
                                           85
86                        A. A DIRECT VIEW OF ρ-KERNELS


for some U(v) ⊂ G, with notation as in Definition 2.18.
     Our goal for the rest of this section is to prove the following theorem.
Theorem A.5. Let L be a subgraph of a Cayley graph, G, on a group, G. The
following conditions are equivalent:
      (1) for all L′ ⊂ G, the SHNC holds for (L, L′ );
      (2) for every vertex family, U, on (L, G, G) we have
                          X                  X
                              |UE (e)|ρ(L) ≤     |U(v)|ρ(L) ;
                         e∈EG                     v∈VG

          and
      (3) for some or any field, F, and some or any totally independent M ∈
          Fρ(L)×G , every straight subspace of K(V ) with K = KM (L) has excess
          zero.
    We know by Theorem 2.4 that the SHNC holds iff it holds for all pairs (L, L′ )
that are subgraphs of a Cayley graph, G. Hence Theorem 2.33, that implies condi-
tion (3) of this theorem, implies the SHNC.
     Proof. Conditions (2) and (3) are easily seen to be equivalent via equa-
tion (A.1) and equation (2.12).
     If U is any vertex family on (L, G, G), let the positive set of U consist of those
v ∈ VG for which |U(v)| > ρ(L) and of those e ∈ EG for which |UE (e)| > ρ(L).
We easily see that the positive set forms a subgraph, L′ , of G, and that the pairs
(P g −1 , P ) such that P is in the positive set and g lies in U(P ) or UE (P ) (as is
appropriate), forms a subgraph, H, of L ×B2 L′ . We see that
                                    X               X
                         −χ(H) =         |UE (e)| −      |U(v)|
                                     e∈EL′               v∈VL′
                             X                        X              
            = ρ(L)χ(L′ ) +           |UE (e)| − ρ(L) −   |U(v)| − ρ(L)
                             e∈EL′                           v∈VL′
                                     X                       X
                 = ρ(L)χ(L′ ) +             |UE (e)|ρ(L) −          |U(v)|ρ(L) .
                                     e∈EG                    v∈VG
Hence we may write
                                            X                       X
(A.2)        − χ(H) − ρ(L)χ(L′ ) =              |UE (e)|ρ(L) −           |U(v)|ρ(L) .
                                         e∈EG                    v∈VG

This equation is the main ingredient in the equivalence of conditions (1) and (3). Let
us now state some graph theoretic lemmas that will firmly establish this equivalence.
Lemma A.6. For any digraphs H ⊂ G, we have
                                      −χ(H) ≤ ρ(G);
and equality holds if H consists of all connected components, X, of G with h1 (X) >
0 and any of those with h1 (X) = 0.
    Proof. The statement about equality is clear from the definition of ρ in equa-
tion (1.1). The inequality can be established graph theoretically by induction on
the number of vertices and edges in G that are not in H. Alternatively, see the end
of Section 1.6.                                                                   
                           A. A DIRECT VIEW OF ρ-KERNELS                               87


Lemma A.7. Let U be a vertex family for (L, G, G), where L is a subgraph of a
Cayley digraph, G, on a group, G. Assume that
                      X                   X
(A.3)                      |UE (e)|ρ(L) −   |U(v)|ρ(L) > 0.
                         e∈EG                  v∈VG

Then there is a vertex family, U ′ , which satisfies this inequality with U replaced by
U ′ , for which the positive set of U ′ , L′ , satisfies −χ(L′ ) = ρ(L′ ).
    Proof. For any subgraph, Y ⊂ G and vertex family W on (L, G, G), set
                           X                  X
               f (W, Y ) =     |WE (e)|ρ(L) −   |W(v)|ρ(L) .
                                e∈EY                      v∈VY

Then clearly we have
                                              X
                            f (U, L′ ) =                 f (U, X),
                                           X∈conn(L′ )

where conn(L′ ) is the set of connected components of L′ . But equation (A.3) says
that f (U, G) > 0, and clearly f (U, L′ ) = f (U, G). Hence we have f (U, X) > 0 for
some connected component, X, of L′ ; fix any such X.
     We claim that ρ(X) = −χ(X). Since X is connected, this is true unless χ(X) =
1; so it suffices to show that χ(X) = 1 is impossible. If χ(X) = 1, then by repeatedly
pruning the leaves of X, i.e., deleting a vertex of degree one and its incident edge
from X, we arrive at an isolated vertex. But if Y is any subgraph of G with a
vertex, v ∈ VY , of degree one, and incident edge e ∈ EY , and if Y ′ is Y with v and
e discarded, we claim that f (U, Y ′ ) ≥ f (U, Y ); indeed, UE (e) ⊂ U(v), so
              f (U, Y ′ ) = f (U, Y ) + |U(v)|ρ(L) − |U(e)|ρ(L) ≥ f (U, Y ).
Hence, by repeatedly pruning X we are left with X ′′ that is a single vertex with
no edges, so f (U, X ′′ ) ≥ f (U, X) > 0. But clearly f (U, X ′′ ) ≤ 0 for X ′′ consisting
of a single vertex. Hence χ(X) = 1 is impossible, and so χ(X) ≤ 0 and hence
ρ(X) = −χ(X).
    For any vertex family, V of (L, G, G) and any subgraph Y ∈ G define a vertex
family V|Y via
                                       
                                         V(v) if v ∈ VY ,
                             V|Y (v) =
                                         ∅      otherwise.
for all v ∈ VG . We easily see that
(A.4)                               V(e) ⊂ (V|L )E (e)
for all e ∈ EL . Hence
                          f (V|Y , G) = f (V|Y , Y ) ≥ f (V, Y ),
using equation (A.4). In particular, for V = U and Y = X we have
                                f (U|X , G) ≥ f (U, X) > 0.
So we take U ′ = U|X and let L′ be its positive set. Then f (U ′ , L′ ) = f (U ′ , G) > 0,
and L′ consists of X plus possibly some addition edges, so L′ is connected and
χ(L′ ) ≤ χ(X) ≤ 0, so ρ(L′ ) = −χ(L′ ).                                                 
88                        A. A DIRECT VIEW OF ρ-KERNELS


    At this point condition (1) of Theorem A.5 easily implies condition (2). For if
condition (2) does not hold, then for some U, and with L′ given as its positive set,
we may assume ρ(L′ ) = −χ(L′ ) we have
                       X                  X
                           |UE (e)|ρ(L) −     |U(v)|ρ(L) > 0
                       e∈EG                v∈VG

and hence
                 ρ(L ×B2 L′ ) ≥ −χ(H) > −ρ(L)χ(L′ ) = ρ(L)ρ(L′ ).
Hence the SHNC is false on a pair of subgraphs of G.
   It remains to show that condition (2) of Theorem A.5 implies condition (1).
Again, we need some graph theoretic considerations.
Lemma A.8. Assume the SHNC is false on a pair of subgraphs, (L, L′ ), of a
Cayley bigraph G on a group G. Then there is a subgraph, L′′ ⊂ L′ , such that
     (1) the SHNC is false on (L, L′′ ),
     (2) L′′ is connected,
     (3) −χ(L′′ ) = ρ(L′′ ), and
     (4) there is a subgraph, H ⊂ L ×B2 L′′ such that −χ(H) = ρ(L ×B2 L′′ ), and
         if U is the vertex family associated to H, then we have
                                     f (U, G) > 0.
    If condition (1) of Theorem A.5 is false, then the hypothesis of the above lemma
holds; but item (4) of the lemma means that condition (2) of Theorem A.5 is false.
Hence we conclude this section, and the proof of Theorem A.5 with the proof of
the above lemma.

     Proof. So assume the SHNC is false on a pair of subgraphs, (L, L′ ). Similar
to before, the SHNC must therefore be false on (L, L′′ ), where L′′ is some connected
component of L. Fix such a connected component, L′′ .
     We cannot have ρ(L′′ ) = 0, for otherwise ρ(L ×B2 L′′ ) = 0 and the SHNC is not
false on (L, L′′ ). Hence we have L′′ ⊂ L′ is connected and ρ(L′′ ) > 0, whereupon
we have −χ(L′′ ) = ρ(L′′ ).
     Now let L′′ ⊂ L′ be a minimal subgraph of L′ (with respect to inclusion of
subgraphs) with the properties that L′′ is connected, ρ(L′′ ) > 0, and the SHNC is
false on (L, L′′ ). We shall show that the lemma holds with this subgraph, L′′ ; we
have already established the first three items in the conclusion.
     Then take any H ⊂ L ×B2 L′′ such that −χ(H) = ρ(L ×B2 L′′ ). We now make
a number of claims regarding L′′ that follow from the minimality of L′′ .
     First, we claim that L′′ has no leaves, i.e., no vertices of degree one. Otherwise,
if v is a vertex of degree one, and e is its incident edge, then there are at least as
many vertices in H over v as there are over v. So letting L′′′ be L′′ with v and e
discarded, we see that ρ(L′′′ ) = ρ(L′′ ); but if H ′ consists of the vertices and edges
of H that do not lie over e or v, then H ′ is a subgraph of H and ρ(H ′ ) = ρ(H)
(since we obtain H ′ from H by discarding isolated vertices over v or vertices over
v along with their single incident edges, lying over e). Hence the SHNC would fail
also on (L, L′′′ ), contradicting the minimality of L′′ .
     Second, we claim that over each e ∈ EL′′ we there are at least ρ(L) + 1 edges
in H; if not, we delete e from L′′ , obtaining L′′′ ⊂ L′′ , and delete the at most ρ(L)
                             A. A DIRECT VIEW OF ρ-KERNELS                              89


edges over e from H, obtaining H ′ that lies over L′′′ ; this yields a strict subgraph,
L′′′ of L′′ such that
          ρ(L ×B2 L′′′ ) ≥ −χ(H ′ ) ≥ −χ(H) − ρ(L) = ρ(L ×B2 L′′ ) − ρ(L)
                                                     
                                 > ρ(L) ρ(L′′ ) − 1 .
But since L′′ is pruned, we have ρ(L′′′ ) = ρ(L′′ ) − 1. So, once again, we have the
SHNC fails on (L, L′′′ ) for some a proper subgraph, L′′′ , of L′′ ; this contradicts the
minimality of L′′ .
    Third, we claim that over each v ∈ VL′′ there are at least ρ(L) + 1 vertices in
H. Indeed, if v is incident upon some edge, e, in L′′ , then e has at least ρ(L) + 1
vertices in H above it, so v does as well. If v is isolated in L′′ , i.e., incident upon
no edge, then L′′ consists of only v, since L′′ is connected; but this contradicts the
fact that ρ(L′′ ) > 0.
    To H is associated a vertex family, U, and an edge family, W. According to
the three claims established in the previous three paragraphs, we have
      v ∈ VL′′ =⇒ |U(v)| ≥ ρ(L) + 1,             e ∈ EL′′ =⇒ |W(e)| ≥ ρ(L) + 1.
Clearly also
                 / VL′′ =⇒ U(v) = ∅,
                v∈                                / EL′′ =⇒ W(e) = ∅.
                                                 e∈
It follows that, as before
                                  X                       X
                    f (U, G) ≥            |W(e)|ρ(L) −            |U(e)|ρ(L)
                                 e∈EL′′                  v∈VL′′

           = −χ(H) − ρ(L)(|EL′′ | − |VL′′ |) = ρ(L ×B2 L′′ ) − ρ(L)ρ(L′′ ),
using the fact that L′′ is connected and ρ(L′′ ) > 0 (so that ρ(L′′ ) = |EL′′ | − |VL′′ |).
Hence f (U, G) > 0, which shows item (4) in the conclusion of the lemma.                 
                                                                                         
                                    Bibliography

[AL02]   Alon Amit and Nathan Linial, Random graph coverings I: General theory and graph
         connectivity, Combinatorica 22 (2002), no. 1, 1–18.
[AM69] M. F. Atiyah and I. G. Macdonald, Introduction to commutative algebra, Addison-
         Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Mass.-London-Don Mills, Ont., 1969. MR 0242802
         (39 #4129)
[Arz00] G. N. Arzhantseva, A property of subgroups of infinite index in a free group, Proc.
         Amer. Math. Soc. 128 (2000), no. 11, 3205–3210. MR MR1694447 (2001b:20040)
[Ati76] M. F. Atiyah, Elliptic operators, discrete groups and von Neumann algebras, Colloque
         “Analyse et Topologie” en l’Honneur de Henri Cartan (Orsay, 1974), Soc. Math. France,
         Paris, 1976, pp. 43–72. Astérisque, No. 32–33. MR MR0420729 (54 #8741)
[Bur71] Robert G. Burns, On the intersection of finitely generated subgroups of a free group.,
         Math. Z. 119 (1971), 121–130. MR MR0279166 (43 #4892)
[Del77] P. Deligne, Cohomologie étale, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 569, Springer-Verlag,
         Berlin, 1977, Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie SGA 4 12 , Avec la col-
         laboration de J. F. Boutot, A. Grothendieck, L. Illusie et J. L. Verdier. MR MR0463174
         (57 #3132)
[DF01] Warren Dicks and Edward Formanek, The rank three case of the Hanna Neumann
         conjecture, J. Group Theory 4 (2001), no. 2, 113–151. MR MR1812321 (2002e:20051)
[Dic94] Warren Dicks, Equivalence of the strengthened Hanna Neumann conjecture and
         the amalgamated graph conjecture, Invent. Math. 117 (1994), no. 3, 373–389.
         MR MR1283723 (95c:20034)
[Eve08] Brent Everitt, Graphs, free groups and the Hanna Neumann conjecture, J. Group The-
         ory 11 (2008), no. 6, 885–899. MR MR2466915
[FMT06] Joel Friedman, Ram Murty, and Jean-Pierre Tillich, Spectral estimates for abelian cayley
         graphs, J. Comb. Theory Ser. B 96 (2006), no. 1, 111–121.
[Fri93]  Joel Friedman, Some geometric aspects of graphs and their eigenfunctions, Duke Math.
         J. 69 (1993), no. 3, 487–525. MR 94b:05134
[Fri03]          , Relative expanders or weakly relatively Ramanujan graphs, Duke Math. J. 118
         (2003), no. 1, 19–35. MR MR1978881 (2004m:05165)
[Fri05]          , Cohomology of grothendieck topologies and lower bounds in boolean complexity,
         http://www.math.ubc.ca/~jf , also http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0512008, to appear.
[Fri06]          , Cohomology of grothendieck topologies and lower bounds in boolean complexity
         ii, http://www.math.ubc.ca/~jf , also http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0604024, to appear.
[Fri07]          , Linear transformations in boolean complexity theory, CiE ’07: Proceedings of
         the 3rd conference on Computability in Europe (Berlin, Heidelberg), Springer-Verlag,
         2007, pp. 307–315.
[Fri08]          , A proof of Alon’s second eigenvalue conjecture and related problems, Mem.
         Amer. Math. Soc. 195 (2008), no. 910, viii+100. MR MR2437174
[Fri11a] Joel Friedman, Sheaves on graphs and a proof of the hanna neumann conjecture, avail-
         able at http://arxiv.org/pdf/1105.0129v1 and at http://www.math.ubc.ca/~jf.
[Fri11b]         , Sheaves on graphs and their homological invariants, available at
         http://arxiv.org/pdf/1104.2665v1 and at http://www.math.ubc.ca/~jf.
[FT05]   Joel Friedman and Jean-Pierre Tillich, Generalized Alon–Boppana theorems and error-
         correcting codes, SIAM J. Discret. Math. 19 (2005), 700–718.
[Ger83] S. M. Gersten, Intersections of finitely generated subgroups of free groups and resolu-
         tions of graphs, Invent. Math. 71 (1983), no. 3, 567–591. MR MR695907 (85m:05037b)


                                               91
92                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


[GM03]   Sergei I. Gelfand and Yuri I. Manin, Methods of homological algebra, second ed.,
         Springer Monographs in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003. MR MR1950475
         (2003m:18001)
[Gro77] Jonathan L. Gross, Every connected regular graph of even degree is a Schreier coset
         graph, J. Combinatorial Theory Ser. B 22 (1977), no. 3, 227–232. MR MR0450121 (56
         #8419)
[Har77] Robin Hartshorne, Algebraic geometry, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1977, Graduate
         Texts in Mathematics, No. 52. MR 57 #3116
[Har92] Joe Harris, Algebraic geometry, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 133, Springer-
         Verlag, New York, 1992, A first course. MR 1182558 (93j:14001)
[How54] A. G. Howson, On the intersection of finitely generated free groups, J. London Math.
         Soc. 29 (1954), 428–434. MR MR0065557 (16,444c)
[HS97]   P. J. Hilton and U. Stammbach, A course in homological algebra, second ed., Grad-
         uate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 4, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1997. MR 1438546
         (97k:18001)
[Imr77a] Wilfried Imrich, On finitely generated subgroups of free groups, Arch. Math. (Basel) 28
         (1977), no. 1, 21–24. MR MR0439941 (55 #12822)
[Imr77b]        , Subgroup theorems and graphs, Combinatorial mathematics, V (Proc. Fifth
         Austral. Conf., Roy. Melbourne Inst. Tech., Melbourne, 1976), Springer, Berlin, 1977,
         pp. 1–27. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 622. MR MR0463016 (57 #2980)
[Iva99]  S. V. Ivanov, On the intersection of finitely generated subgroups in free products of
         groups, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 9 (1999), no. 5, 521–528. MR MR1719719
         (2000k:20023)
[Iva01]         , Intersecting free subgroups in free products of groups, Internat. J. Algebra
         Comput. 11 (2001), no. 3, 281–290. MR MR1847180 (2002e:20052)
[JKM03] Toshiaki Jitsukawa, Bilal Khan, and Alexei G. Myasnikov, On the Hanna Neumann
         conjecture, 2003, Available as http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0302009.
[Kha02] Bilal Khan, Positively generated subgroups of free groups and the Hanna Neumann
         conjecture, Combinatorial and geometric group theory (New York, 2000/Hoboken, NJ,
         2001), Contemp. Math., vol. 296, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2002, pp. 155–170.
         MR MR1921710 (2003e:20027)
[Lan02] Serge Lang, Algebra, third ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 211, Springer-
         Verlag, New York, 2002. MR 1878556 (2003e:00003)
[Lüc02] Wolfgang Lück, L2 -invariants: theory and applications to geometry and K-theory,
         Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of Modern Surveys
         in Mathematics [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas. 3rd Series. A Series of Mod-
         ern Surveys in Mathematics], vol. 44, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002. MR MR1926649
         (2003m:58033)
[Min10] Igor Mineyev, The topology and analysis of the Hanna Neumann Conjecture, Preprint.
         Available at http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~mineyev/math/art/shnc.pdf .
[Min11a]        , Groups, graphs, and the Hanna Neumann Conjecture, Preprint. Available at
         http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~mineyev/math/art/gr-gr-shnc.pdf .
[Min11b]        , Submultiplicativity and the Hanna Neumann Conjecture, Preprint. Available
         at http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~mineyev/math/art/submult-shnc.pdf.
[MW02] J. Meakin and P. Weil, Subgroups of free groups: a contribution to the Hanna Neumann
         conjecture, Proceedings of the Conference on Geometric and Combinatorial Group The-
         ory, Part I (Haifa, 2000), vol. 94, 2002, pp. 33–43. MR MR1950872 (2003k:20028)
[Neu56] Hanna Neumann, On the intersection of finitely generated free groups, Publ. Math.
         Debrecen 4 (1956), 186–189. MR MR0078992 (18,11f)
[Neu57]         , On the intersection of finitely generated free groups. Addendum, Publ. Math.
         Debrecen 5 (1957), 128. MR MR0093537 (20 #61)
[Neu90] Walter D. Neumann, On intersections of finitely generated subgroups of free groups,
         Groups—Canberra 1989, Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1456, Springer, Berlin, 1990,
         pp. 161–170. MR MR1092229 (92b:20026)
[Neu07] Walter D. Neumann, A short proof that positive generation implies the Hanna Neumann
         Conjecture, 2007, Available as http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0702395, to appear.
[Ser83] Brigitte Servatius, A short proof of a theorem of Burns, Math. Z. 184 (1983), no. 1,
         133–137. MR MR711734 (85c:20019)
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                           93


[sga72a] Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas. Tome 1: Théorie des topos,
         Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1972, Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie 1963–
         1964 (SGA 4), Dirigé par M. Artin, A. Grothendieck, et J. L. Verdier. Avec la collab-
         oration de N. Bourbaki, P. Deligne et B. Saint-Donat, Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
         Vol. 269. MR 50 #7130
[sga72b] Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas. Tome 2, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
         1972, Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie 1963–1964 (SGA 4), Dirigé par
         M. Artin, A. Grothendieck et J. L. Verdier. Avec la collaboration de N. Bourbaki, P.
         Deligne et B. Saint-Donat, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 270. MR 50 #7131
[sga73] Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas. Tome 3, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
         1973, Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie 1963–1964 (SGA 4), Dirigé par
         M. Artin, A. Grothendieck et J. L. Verdier. Avec la collaboration de P. Deligne et B.
         Saint-Donat, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 305. MR 50 #7132
[sga77] Cohomologie l-adique et fonctions L, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 589, Springer-
         Verlag, Berlin, 1977, Séminaire de Géometrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie 1965–1966 (SGA
         5), Edité par Luc Illusie. MR MR0491704 (58 #10907)
[ST96]   H. M. Stark and A. A. Terras, Zeta functions of finite graphs and coverings, Adv. Math.
         121 (1996), no. 1, 124–165. MR MR1399606 (98b:11094)
[Sta83] John R. Stallings, Topology of finite graphs, Invent. Math. 71 (1983), no. 3, 551–565.
         MR MR695906 (85m:05037a)
[Tar92] Gábor Tardos, On the intersection of subgroups of a free group, Invent. Math. 108
         (1992), no. 1, 29–36. MR MR1156384 (93c:20048)
[Tar96]          , Towards the Hanna Neumann conjecture using Dicks’ method, Invent. Math.
         123 (1996), no. 1, 95–104. MR MR1376247 (97b:20029)
[Wis05] Daniel T. Wise, The coherence of one-relator groups with torsion and the Hanna Neu-
         mann conjecture, Bull. London Math. Soc. 37 (2005), no. 5, 697–705. MR MR2164831
         (2006f:20037)
