    CUSPED SPACES FOR HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, AND
             APPLICATIONS TO DEHN FILLING QUOTIENTS


                                GIORGIO MANGIONI AND ALESSANDRO SISTO


        Abstract. We introduce a construction that simultaneously yields cusped spaces of relatively hyper-
        bolic groups, and spaces quasi-isometric to Teichmüller metrics. We use this to study Dehn-filling-like
        quotients of various groups, among which mapping class groups MCGpSn q of n-punctured spheres.
        In particular, we show that MCGpS5 q (resp. the braid group on four strands) has infinite hyperbolic
        quotients (strongly) not isomorphic to hyperbolic quotients of any other given MCGpSn q (resp. any
        other braid group). These quotients are obtained from MCGpS5 q by modding out suitable large pow-
        ers of Dehn twists, and we further argue that the corresponding quotients of the extended mapping
        class group have trivial outer automorphism groups. We obtain these results by studying torsion
        elements in the relevant quotients.




                                                                        To bake a cake in the eye of a storm; to
                                                                        feed yourself sugar on the cusp of danger.

                                                                                                      Ocean Vuong,
                                                                                 On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous,
                                                                             about Patricia Polacco’s Thunder Cake

                                                  Introduction
   Cusped spaces, as introduced in [GM08, Bow12], are fundamental tools in the study of relatively
hyperbolic groups. For instance, relevantly to this paper, their interplay with algebraic Dehn fillings has
produced countless applications; a non-exhaustive list of references includes [GM08, AGM09, Ago13,
DG18, GM18, DT19, GMS19, GM21, Wan21]. Cusped spaces share similarities with Teichmüller
space, regarded as a coarse geometric object when endowed with the Teichmüller metric, in that
its thin part, where the mapping class group action is not cocompact, can be described in terms of
products of horoballs [Min96, Dur16]. We unify these perspectives by introducing a construction of
cusped spaces for relatively hierarchically hyperbolic groups (HHGs), as defined in [BHS17b, BHS19],
that simultaneously yields cusped spaces and Teichmüller spaces.
   The starting point is a relatively HHG admitting a combinatorial model analogous to Masur-
Minsky’s marking complexes [MM00], for instance a relatively hyperbolic group or a mapping class
group. The precise requirements on the group, which we defer to Definition 2.3, are not very restrictive
in view of results from [HMS26], see discussion below. The construction of the cusped space is then es-
sentially a generalisation of Durham’s augmented marking complex for the Teichmüller metric [Dur16],
as we explain in more detail in Remark 3.8. For the reader familiar with hierarchical hyperbolicity, we
roughly replace every hyperbolic space at the bottom of the hierarchy with the combinatorial horoball
over it; this is described in more detail below, and implemented in Definition 2.9. With this in mind,
the first properties of our construction are:
Theorem A. Let G be a relative HHG satisfying Definition 2.3, and let Z be its cusped space as in
Definition 2.9. Then:
    (1) Z is a hierarchically hyperbolic space;
    (2) G acts on Z and the orbit maps are coarse embeddings;
    (3) for G relatively hyperbolic, Z is G-equivariantly quasi-isometric to the cusped space of G;
    (4) for G a mapping class group of a finite-type surface, Z is G-equivariantly quasi-isometric to
        the corresponding Teichmüller metric.
                                                           1
2                                       G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


We expect our cusped spaces to serve as a general-purpose tool in the future. For instance, it might be
possible to use them to prove the Farrell-Jones Conjecture for a large class of relative HHGs, combining
techniques from [Bar17] and [DMS25] (which in turn relies on the criterion from [BB19]). In this
paper we focus on applications to the study of “Dehn filling like” quotients, of the type considered in
[DHS21, BHMS24, MS26]. In particular, we prove the following, where Sn denotes the n-punctured
sphere and Bn is the braid group on n strands.
Theorem B.       (1) Let n ě 5 be an integer. Then there exists a non-elementary hyperbolic quotient
      Q of B4 such that any homomorphism ϕ : Bn Ñ Q has virtually cyclic image.
  (2) Let n ě 6 be an integer. Then there exists a non-elementary hyperbolic quotient Q of MCGpS5 q
      such that any homomorphism ϕ : MCGpSn q Ñ Q has finite image.
Theorem B gives a strong way to distinguish B4 (resp. MCGpS5 q) among all other braid groups (resp.
mapping class groups of spheres) using infinite hyperbolic quotients; this is in analogy with profinite
rigidity results, where finite quotients are used instead. We emphasise that Theorem B is extremely
delicate: for instance, a finite-index subgroup of Bn for n ě 5 surjects onto B4 (by forgetting strands),
whence onto any quotient of it. This subtlety is reflected in the proof of Theorem 6.1, which implies
both statements of Theorem B and crucially uses properties of finite subgroups of MCGpSn q.
   The quotients Q arising in Theorem B are in fact all virtually of the form MCG ˘ pS5 q{DTN , where
DTN is the normal subgroup generated by all N -th powers of Dehn twists. For suitable N , these were
shown to be hyperbolic in [DHS21]. Understanding torsion in these groups is the key to proving the
theorem above, and we can also exploit this knowledge to control their automorphism groups.
Theorem C. There exists N0 ą 0 such that, for all multiples N of N0 , the group GN “ MCG ˘ pS5 q{DTN
satisfies Aut pGN q – GN .
   In [MS25], we proved an analogue of Theorem C for MCG ˘ pSn q{DTN where n ě 7, but the
proof there is completely different in nature (it first establishes quasi-isometric rigidity, relying on a
sufficiently rich pattern of quasiflats and results from [BHS21], and then uses that automorphisms
give quasi-isometries). Though the remaining case n “ 6 cannot be tackled with the tools from
[MS25], one can likely use methods similar to the ones we use here to settle it, provided that a certain
technical improvement on [BHMS24] can be achieved. We believe it can, and we explain this further
in Remark F.
   We also point out that, by combining existing results in the literature and using completely different
tools, one could already deduce that the outer automorphism group of GN is finite (see Remark 5.23).
Roughly, property (FA) for MCG ˘ pS5 q implies that the GN are rigid in the sense of JSJ theory, but
this type of argument cannot prove that outer automorphism groups are trivial rather than finite.
   In the case of relatively hyperbolic groups, sequences of peripheral quotients can be studied via the
corresponding quotients of cusped spaces, which turn out to be uniformly hyperbolic; this is exploited
for instance in [DG18]. Inspired by this, we consider sequences of Dehn filling quotients of short HHGs,
a particularly simple class of HHG introduced in [Man24]. Notably, MCG ˘ pS5 q is a short HHG, and
the quotients GN from Theorem C are examples of Dehn filling quotients (see Notation 5.5). The
following result, which is the starting point towards all the aforementioned applications, establishes that
the corresponding quotients of cusped spaces are “uniform”, in analogy with the relatively hyperbolic
case. We refer to Remark 1.10 for details of the notion of “uniformly HHS”.
Theorem D. Let G be a short HHG, with cusped space Z. There exists N0 ą 0, such that the spaces
Z{DTN for all multiples N of N0 are uniformly HHS.
It was proven in [HHP23], using injective spaces, that all HHGs have bounded torsion. The proofs in
fact give a bound depending on the underlying hierarchical data, so if a family of groups acts uniformly
properly on a uniform family of HHS (such as the collection Z{DTN from Theorem D) then the bound
on torsion will be uniform. Because of this, we are able to show the following, which we state for
MCGpS5 q only for simplicity even though an analogue holds for all short HHGs.
                                        CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                            3


Corollary E. There exists N0 ą 0 such that, for all multiples N of N0 , any finite-order element of
MCGpS5 q{DTN is the image of an element of MCGpS5 q which is either finite-order, stabilises a curve,
or swaps two disjoint curves.

We expect that a similar result can be obtained for all quotients of mapping class groups by suitable
powers of Dehn twists, as well as the further quotients constructed in [BHMS24]. We explain the
currently missing technical statement in Remark F below.

Outline and strategies. In Section 1 we recall necessary background, in particular about the com-
binatorial approach to hierarchical hyperbolicity from [BHMS24]. Very roughly, one can extract a
hierarchical structure from hyperbolic simplicial complexes where all links are also hyperbolic. In-
spired by [HMS26], we consider simplicial complexes obtained via the following “blowup” procedure:
                                                                        p0q
starting from a “supporting” simplicial complex X, every vertex v P X is replaced by the cone over a
certain graph Lv , thus ensuring that Lv appears as a link in the blown-up graph. This is a fairly broad
setting, as a lot of naturally occurring HHSs admit a combinatorial structure of this type by results
from [HMS26]. The associated hierarchically hyperbolic space (HHS) is then a graph whose vertices
are maximal simplices of the blown-up graph. For mapping class groups, the supporting complex is
the curve complex and the Lv ’s are annular curve graphs, so that maximal simplices of the blown-up
complex correspond to markings.
    In Section 2 we describe the (relative) combinatorial HHSs that we will consider, which we call
(relative) squid HHS and as mentioned above are blow-ups. See Figure 3 to visualise where this notion
fits among other version of hierarchical hyperbolicity. Section 2 also contains the construction of cusped
spaces, which is done by replacing each Lv with the combinatorial horoball over it. Theorem 2.12
summarises the main properties of this construction, and in particular proves the first two items of
Theorem A. It is possible to extend the construction beyond (relative) squid HHGs, but this requires
different techniques and will be done in [HPZ].
    In Section 3 we verify that our construction indeed applies to many (relative) HHSs, and that
it yields cusped spaces of relatively hyperbolic groups and Teichmüller space (the last two items of
Theorem A). There we also prove Proposition 3.4, which is of independent interest and could prove
useful elsewhere as well. Roughly, the Proposition says that, when starting from a HHS structure and
passing to a combinatorial version of it, as in [HMS26], the associated projections between domains
remain coarsely the same.
    In Section 4 we establish Theorem 4.2, which allows us to control torsion elements in quotients of
(relative) HHGs with controlled geometry. As mentioned above, this uses arguments from [HHP23],
applied to the action on our cusped spaces.
    We leverage our control on torsion in Section 5, where we study automorphisms of quotients of
short HHGs. Towards this, we firstly show Theorem D(=Corollary 5.10); the latter, combined with
Theorem 4.2, immediately yields Corollary 5.11, which is a more general version of Corollary E about
finite subgroups in quotients.
    Having established this, the goal of Theorem 5.19 is to extract a simplicial automorphism of a
certain graph from a group automorphism; for MCGpS5 q{DTN , this graph is the quotient of the curve
graph by DTN . To this extent, the strategy (for MCGpS5 q) is roughly to characterise images of Dehn
twists in MCGpS5 q{DTN as those elements that have a sufficiently large finite order, and a sufficiently
large centraliser (we need the latter to rule out images of multi-twists).
    In turn, every automorphism of the quotient of the curve graph is induced by a mapping class, by
an analogue of Ivanov’s theorem we proved in [MS25], so Theorem C(=Corollary 5.22) follows from
Theorem 5.19.
    In Section 6 we prove Theorem 6.1 and both parts of Theorem B as corollaries, again exploiting
knowledge about torsion, and in particular using that torsion elements have “very large” normal closure
in mapping class groups of spheres. This should be compared to several results in the literature where
torsion is used to constrain homomorphisms between mapping class groups [HK05, CL24].
4                                      G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


Remark F (Squid structures for Dehn twist quotients). Let S be any finite-type surface, and let
MCGpSq be its mapping class group. It is shown in [BHMS24] that MCGpSq{DTN , for N deep
enough, is a combinatorial HHG. However, the structure found there is not a squid HHG structure,
meaning a structure as in Section 2: this is because the underlying graph X, which is the corresponding
quotient of the curve complex, is not a blowup. Nonetheless, one can blow up each vertex of X to
a cone over a quotient of an annular curve graph. We expect this should yield a relative squid
HHG structure with uniform constants over all N large enough; this would almost immediately give
generalisations of Theorem D (on cusped spaces being uniformly HHS) and Corollary E (about torsion
elements in quotients). Most likely, this would also allow one to extend Theorem C (on automorphisms
of quotients) to the six-punctured sphere; recall that the cases with more punctures are covered by
[MS25]. Finally, it would also be a starting point for more general versions of Theorem B (on different
mapping class groups having different hyperbolic quotients); however, since quotients by large powers
of Dehn twists are in general not hyperbolic, a one-to-one analogue of Theorem B would probably
require uniform relative squid HHG structures also for the further quotients studied in [BHMS24].

Acknowledgements. We thank Arthur Bartels and Rémi Coulon for suggesting possible future ap-
plications of cusped spaces, Alex Wright for several insightful questions, and Matt Durham for many
useful suggestions. We are also grateful to Mark Hagen, Harry Petyt, and Abdul Zalloum for discus-
sions on the generalisation of cusped spaces beyond combinatorial HHG.


                                           1. Background
   In this Section, we gather all definitions and tools from the world of (combinatorial hierarchical)
hyperbolicity that we shall need. We first recall here a construction of Groves-Manning [GM08], see
also [Bow12], inspired by horoballs in real hyperbolic spaces.

Definition 1.1. Let Γ be a simplicial graph. The combinatorial horoball Hor pΓq with base Γ is the
simplicial graph whose vertex set is Γp0q ˆ N, and with the following two types of edges:
     ‚ For every p P Γp0q and n P N, pp, nq is adjacent to pp, n ` 1q;
     ‚ For every p, q P Γp0q and n P N, if dΓ pp, qq ď 2n then pp, nq is adjacent to pq, nq.
We often denote pp, nq P Γp0q ˆ N simply by pn .

The base Γ is naturally contained in the corresponding combinatorial horoball, but it is not quasi-
isometrically embedded into it. Rather, it is coarsely embedded, in the sense of the following definition:

Definition 1.2 (Coarse embedding). Given two metric spaces pX, dX q and pY, dY q and positive real
functions m, M – Rě0 Ñ Rě0 such that mptq ÝÝÝÝÑ `8, a map f : X Ñ Y is a coarse embedding if
                                                 tÑ`8
for every x, x1 P X,
                           `           ˘                         `           ˘
                          m dX px, x1 q ď dY pf pxq, f px1 qq ď M dX px, x1 q .
M and m are called the coarse embedding functions of f .

In real hyperbolic spaces every horosphere is a coarsely embedded copy of the Euclidean space inside
the corresponding horoball. Analogously, combinatorial horoballs satisfy the following:

Lemma 1.3 (See proof of [GM08, Lemma 3.10]). The inclusion Γ ãÑ Hor pΓq is a uniform coarse
embedding. More precisely, for every x, y P Γp0q , dHorpΓq px, yq ě 32 log2 pdΓ px, yqq ` 1.

Geodesics in combinatorial horoballs admit a similar description as those in real horoballs, and one
can use this to show:

Theorem 1.4 ([GM08]). There exists δ0 ą 0 such that, for every Γ, Hor pΓq is δ0 -hyperbolic.

To summarise, combinatorial horoballs give a way to coarsely embed any graph into a hyperbolic space.
                                       CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                           5


1.1. Pills of combinatorial hierarchical hyperbolicity. We recall here the notion of a combinato-
                                                                                              p0q
rial HHS from [BHMS24]. For the whole section, let X be a simplicial graph, with vertex set X , and
let W be an X-graph, that is, a simplicial graph whose vertex set is the set of all maximal simplices
of X. We conflate X with the flag simplicial complex that has X as the 1-skeleton, and in particular
often refer to cliques in X as simplices of X. The main theorem of [BHMS24] describes conditions
on a pair pX, Wq to ensure that W is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. We now gather the required
terminology to phrase these conditions.
   Given two subgraphs A, B of X (by which we always mean full subgraphs), if B Ď LinkX pAq
we write A ‹ B to denote the full subgraph spanned by Ap0q Y B p0q . Moreover, we set Star pAq –
LinkX pAq ‹ A.
   Links of simplices will correspond to hyperbolic spaces of an HHS structure. Because of this, we
are interested in simplices that have the same link.
Definition 1.5 (Saturation). For ∆, ∆1 simplices of X, we write ∆ „ ∆1 to mean LinkX p∆q “
LinkX p∆1 q. Let r∆s be the „–equivalence class of ∆, and let
                                               ¨           ˛p0q
                                                   ď
                                     Satp∆q “ ˝         ∆1 ‚ .
                                                   ∆1 Pr∆s

Let S the set of „–classes of non-maximal simplices in X.
  The hyperbolic spaces of the HHS structures we will be interested in are not exactly links in X (in
most cases there are discrete links), but rather we have to add certain edges, as specified below.
Definition 1.6 (Augmented links). Let X `W be the simplicial graph such that:
      ‚ the 0–skeleton of X `W is X p0q ;
      ‚ if v, w P X p0q are adjacent in X, then they are adjacent in X `W ;
      ‚ if two vertices in W are adjacent, then we consider σ, ρ, the associated maximal simplices of
        X, and in X `W we connect each vertex of σ to each vertex of ρ.
For each simplex ∆ of X, let Y∆ be the subgraph of X `W spanned by pX `W qp0q ´ Satp∆q. The
                                                                                p0q
augmented link of ∆ is the induced subgraph Cp∆q of Y∆ spanned by LinkX p∆q (we emphasise that
                                      `W
we are taking links in X, not in X       , and then considering the subgraphs of Y∆ induced by those
links). Note that, if ∆ „ ∆1 , then Y∆ “ Y∆1 and Cp∆q “ Cp∆1 q .
  We are ready to define combinatorial HHS.
Definition 1.7 (Combinatorial HHS). A combinatorial hierarchically hyperbolic space is the data of
a simplicial graph X, an X-graph W, and two constants n, δ ě 0, satisfying the following:
    (1) Any chain LinkX p∆1 q Ĺ ¨ ¨ ¨ Ĺ LinkX p∆k q has length at most n, which is called the complexity
        of pX, Wq.
    (2) For each rΣs P S, CpΣq is δ–hyperbolic.
    (3) For each rΣs P S, CpΣq is δ–quasi-isometrically embedded in YΣ .
    (4) For every r∆s, rΣs P S for which there exists rΓs P S such that LinkX pΓq Ď LinkX p∆q X
        LinkX pΣq and diampCpΓqq ě δ, there exists a non-maximal simplex Π containing Σ such that
        LinkX pΠq Ď LinkX p∆q, and all Γ as above satisfy LinkX pΓq Ď LinkX pΠq.
    (5) For each r∆s P S and v ‰ w P LinkX p∆q, if v, w are adjacent in Cp∆q but not in LinkX p∆q,
        then there exist W-adjacent maximal simplices Πv , Πw such that ∆ ‹ tvu Ď Πv and ∆ ‹ twu Ď
        Πw .
[BHMS24, Theorem 1.18] states that, if pX, W, n, δq is a combinatorial HHS, then W is a hierarchically
hyperbolic space, in the sense of [BHS19, Definition 1.1]. More precisely, the structure on W has S as
domain set and augmented links as coordinate spaces, while relations and projections between domains
are encoded by the following additional definitions.
Definition 1.8 (Relations between domains). Let r∆s, r∆1 s P S. Then:
6                                       G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


      ‚ r∆s Ď r∆1 s if LinkX p∆q Ď LinkX p∆1 q;
      ‚ r∆sKr∆1 s if LinkX p∆1 q Ď LinkX pLinkX p∆qq.
If r∆s and r∆1 s are neither K–related nor Ď–related, we write r∆s&r∆1 s.
Definition 1.9 (Projections). Fix r∆s P S and define a map πr∆s : W Ñ 2Cp∆q as follows. Let
p : Y∆ Ñ 2Cp∆q be the coarse closest point projection, i.e.
                            ppxq “ ty P Cp∆q : dY∆ px, yq ď dY∆ px, Cp∆qq ` 1u.
If w is a maximal simplex of X, the intersection w X Y∆ is non-empty and has diameter at most 1 by
[BHMS24, Lemma 1.15]. Hence set
                                        πr∆s pwq “ ppw X Y∆ q,
and for every w, w1 P W set
                                                   `                    ˘
                              dr∆s pw, w1 q – dCp∆q πr∆s pwq, πr∆s pw1 q .
If r∆s, r∆1 s P S satisfy r∆s&r∆1 s or r∆1 s Ĺ r∆s, set
                                          r∆1 s
                                         ρr∆s “ ppSatp∆1 q X Y∆ q.
                    r∆1 s
If r∆s Ĺ r∆1 s, let ρr∆s : Cp∆1 q Ñ Cp∆q be defined as follows. On Cp∆1 q X Y∆ , it is the restriction of p;
otherwise, it takes the value H.
Remark 1.10 (Uniform combinatorial HHSs). It can be extracted from the proof of [BHMS24, The-
orem 1.18] that, for a combinatorial HHS pX, W, n, δq, all constants and functions involved in the
hierarchically hyperbolic structure depend only on n and δ (in particular, the function appearing in
the Uniqueness axiom is explicitly constructed at [BHMS24, page 50]). This is relevant as every coarse
object naturally associated to a hierarchically hyperbolic space, such as its coarse median structure
[BHS19] or its coarsely injective structure [HHP23], ultimately only depends on these constants and
functions. With this in mind, we say that a family of combinatorial HHSs is uniform if they satisfy
Definition 1.7 with respect to uniform constants n and δ.
1.2. Blowup graphs. All the combinatorial HHSs that we consider in this paper will be blowups, in
a sense that we now describe. We note that the combinatorial HHSs constructed in [HMS26], where a
combinatorial structure is given for many HHSs, are also all blowups: this will be explored further in
Section 3.2 below.
                                                                          p0q
Definition 1.11. Given a simplicial graph X and, for every v P X , a set Lv , the blowup of X
                                                                               p0q
with respect to tLv uvPX p0q is the graph X defined as follows. For every v P X , X contains the cone
                                           p0q
Cone pvq – tvu ‹ tLv u. Given v, w P X , Cone pvq and Cone pwq span a join in X if their apices v
and w are adjacent in X, and are disjoint otherwise. See Figure 1.
                                                                   p0q
   We call X the support graph, Lv the base of the cone below v P X , and the pair pX, tLv uvPX p0q q
the blowup data. When the blowup data is not relevant or clear from context, we say that X is a
blowup graph.

Notation 1.12. If X is the blowup of pX, tLv uvPX p0q q, we identify X with the subgraph of X spanned
by the apices of the cones. Let p : X Ñ X be the 1-Lipschitz retraction mapping every cone to its
apex. If Σ is a simplex of X, we denote ppΣq by Σ, which is the support of Σ.
                                                                          p0q
   Given a simplex Θ of X, together with a point p P Lv for every v P Θ , we denote the X-simplex
                                                                                             p
spanned by tv, puvPΘ by Θ – pv, pqvPΘ . If Θ is maximal in X then Θ is maximal in X, and all maximal
simplices of X are of this form.
                   p0q
   For every v P X we denote by ∆v any simplex of X whose link is Lv . Notice that Lv is discrete,
so r∆v s is Ď-minimal.
   Links in a blowup admit a natural decomposition in terms of blowups of links and parts of cones,
as described in the following lemma.
                                       CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                          7




                            Cone                                    Cone




                        Figure 1. The blowup of two adjacent vertices of X.

Lemma 1.13 (Decomposition of links [HMS26, Lemma 4.3]). Let Σ be a simplex of X. Then
                            `        ` ˘˘ ´                                ¯
            LinkX pΣq “ p´1 LinkX Σ ‹ ‹vPΣp0q LinkConepvq pΣ X Cone pvqq .

Corollary 1.14. Any X-simplex Σ is of one of the following types:
    ‚ Bounded type: LinkX pΣq is either a single vertex or a non-trivial join.
                                     p0q
     ‚ Blowup type: for each v P Σ         , we have that Σ X Cone pvq is an edge.
                                               p0q
     ‚ Cone type: Σ “ ∆v for some v P X              .
The following feature of intersections of links is a common property for combinatorial HHSs (for
example, it holds for curve graphs of surfaces, as explained in [BHMS24, Remark 6.6]).
Definition 1.15. A simplicial graph Γ has cleanish intersections if, for every two simplices Σ, Φ of Γ,
there exist two simplices Π, Ψ such that Σ Ď Π and
                               LinkΓ pΣq X LinkΓ pΦq “ LinkΓ pΠq ‹ Ψ.
We conclude this section with a technical lemma saying that blowups preserve cleanish intersections.
Lemma 1.16. Let X be a blowup of a graph X. If X has cleanish intersections then X has cleanish
intersections.
Proof. Let Σ, Φ be simplices of X. We want to find two simplices Π, Ψ such that Σ Ď Π and LinkX pΣqX
LinkX pΦq “ LinkX pΠq ‹ Ψ. Since
                LinkX pΣq X LinkX pΦq “ LinkX pΣ ‹ pΦ X LinkX pΣqqq X LinkX pΦq ,
we first´ replace
             ¯    Σ by Σ1 – Σ ‹ pΦ X LinkX pΣqq. Now let Ψ be a (possibly trivial) X-simplex inside
           1          ` ˘
LinkX Σ X LinkX Φ such that
                                      ´ 1¯         ` ˘        ` ˘
                                LinkX Σ X LinkX Φ Ď Star Ψ ,
and which is maximal with this property. Then
                         ´ 1¯           ` ˘ ´          ´ 1     ¯         ` ˘¯
                  LinkX Σ X LinkX Φ “ LinkX Σ ‹ Ψ X LinkX Φ ‹ Ψ.
                                                                  1
                                                                           ´ 1  ¯
Since X has cleanish intersections, there exist two simplices Θ, Ψ Ď LinkX Σ ‹ Ψ such that
                             ´ 1     ¯           ` ˘          ´ 1       ¯    1
                      LinkX Σ ‹ Ψ X LinkX Φ “ LinkX Σ ‹ Ψ ‹ Θ ‹ Ψ ,

and by maximality of Ψ we must have that Ψ1 “ H. Summing up, we proved that
                            ´ 1¯          ` ˘        ´ 1        ¯
(1)                    LinkX Σ X LinkX Φ “ LinkX Σ ‹ Ψ ‹ Θ ‹ Ψ.

We now construct the simplices Π and Ψ that we need. Let Ψ “ Ψ, seen as a simplex of X. Let
     1
Π “ Σ ‹ Ψ ‹ Θ, and define a simplex Π with support Π as follows:
8                                             G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO

               1      ` ˘
     ‚ If v P Σ ´Star Φ , let ΠXCone pvq be an edge containing Σ1 XCone pvq, so that LinkConepvq pΠ X Cone pvqq “
       H;
               1       ` ˘
     ‚ If v P Σ X Star Φ , let Π X Cone pvq “ Σ1 X Cone pvq. In particular, LinkConepvq pΠ X Cone pvqq
       and Cone pvq X LinkX pΣ1 q X LinkX pΦq coincide;
     ‚ If v P Θ, let Π X Cone pvq be an edge;
     ‚ If v P Ψ, let Π X Cone pvq “ tvu, so that LinkConepvq pΠ X Cone pvqq “ Lv .

                                                    1
                                                                                ´ 1¯
         Π X Cone pvq                           Σ                          LinkX Σ
               Φ                         Σ1 X Cone pvq                          /
                ` ˘                       1
          LinkX Φ                        Σ X Cone pvq                    v whenever v P Ψ
                 ` ˘
         X ´ Star Φ         complete Σ1 X Cone pvq to an edge choose an edge whenever v P Θ

        Figure 2. Schematic representation of Π. Each cell describes how Π X Cone pvq is
                                   p0q
        defined whenever v P X     belongs to the area given by the intersection between the
                                                             1
        row label and the column label: for example, if v P Σ XΦ we have that ΠXCone pvq “
          1
        Σ X Cone pvq.

It is clear by the first two bullets that Π extends Σ1 , so we are left to show that
                                                    ` ˘
                                LinkX pΦq X LinkX Σ1 “ LinkX pΠq ‹ Ψ.
Firstly Ψ Ď LinkX pΦq X LinkX pΣ1 q by construction. Next, let u P LinkX pΠq Ď LinkX pΣ1 q, and
                                                                                                  1
we claim that u ´P LinkX¯ pΦq. By inspection of Lemma 1.13, we must have that either ppuq P Σ ,
                    1
or ppuq P LinkX Σ ‹ Θ . In the first case, a careful inspection of how we defined Π shows that
                                                   1       ` ˘                           ´ 1    ¯
u P LinkX pΦq, and moreover u P LinkX pΨq since Σ P LinkX Ψ . Otherwise ppuq P LinkX Σ ‹ Θ Ă
       ` ˘                                                             ´ 1¯         ` ˘        ` ˘
LinkX Φ , and therefore u P LinkX pΦq; this also shows that u P LinkX Σ X LinkX Φ Ď Star Ψ ,
so that again u P LinkX pΨq. We just showed that LinkX pΠq and Ψ span a join, and moreover that
LinkX pΦq X LinkX pΣ1 q Ě LinkX pΠq ‹ Ψ.                                                     ´ 1¯
   For the converse inclusion, let u P LinkX pΦq X LinkX pΣ1 q, so that ppuq belongs to Star Σ X
     ` ˘
Star Φ . There are two possible cases to consider:
                        1
     ‚ If ppuq P Σ then LinkConepvq pΠ X Cone pvqq “ Cone pvq X LinkX pΣ1 q X LinkX pΦq by how we
       constructed Π, so u P Link
                                ´ Π1pΨq.
                                    ¯        ` ˘           ` ˘                       ` ˘
     ‚ Otherwise ppuq P LinkX Σ X LinkX Φ “ LinkX Π ‹ Ψ. If ppuq P LinkX Π then u P
        LinkX pΠq. Otherwise ppuq P Ψ, so either u P Ψ “ Ψ, or u P Lppuq , which coincides with
        LinkConepppuqq pΠ X Cone pppuqqq by construction. In both cases u P LinkX pΠq ‹ Ψ, as required.
                                                                                                     □

                                  2. Cusped spaces for squid HHSs
  We will be able to construct a cusped space for any relative HHS with a nice combinatorial structure.
We make this precise in the next definition.
2.1. Squid HHS.
Definition 2.1. A squid HHS is a combinatorial HHS pX, W, n, δq, where X is a blowup of a graph X
with cleanish intersections. A relative squid HHS is defined analogously, except that Definition 1.7.(2)
is replaced by:
    (2’) For each non-maximal simplex Σ, either CpΣq is δ-hyperbolic, or Σ is of the form ∆v for some
              p0q
        vPX         .
                                      CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                                9


We often drop the constants n and δ when they are not relevant, and refer to a (relative) squid HHS
simply by pX, Wq.
Remark 2.2. Notice that, for every simplex Σ of X, there exists a simplex Θ of X such that
LinkX pΘq “ Σ. This shows that the dimension of X is bounded above by the constant n, since
every chain of inclusions of simplices in X induces a chain of inclusions of links of simplices of X.
There is a natural notion of action on a squid HHS, leading to the definition of a squid HHG:
Definition 2.3. Let pX, Wq be a (relative) squid HHS, with support graph X, and let G be a finitely
generated group. A G-action on pX, Wq is a simplicial action of G on X such that:
     ‚ The action preserves X;
     ‚ There are finitely many G-orbits of simplices in X;
     ‚ The action on X induces a simplicial action on W.
If moreover G acts geometrically on W, then we say G is a (relative) squid HHG.
   The figure below summarises the relations among the various versions of hierarchical hyperbolicity
relevant for this paper.




        Figure 3. The various notions of hierarchical hyperbolicity at play in this paper, with
        arrows representing inclusions. Objects from the right column belong to the world
        of coarse geometry, while those in the middle and left columns are combinatorial in
        nature. At present, a robust definition of a relative combinatorial HHG has not been
        devised yet (hence we put this notion in a dashed box). Any reasonable notion should
        include both relative squid HHGs and combinatorial HHGs, and provide examples of
        relative HHGs.

Lemma 2.4. Let pX, Wq be a relative squid HHS. If G acts on pX, Wq then there are finitely many
G-orbits of links of simplices in X.
Proof. Recall that, by Lemma 1.13, the link of a simplex Σ is given by
                               `        ` ˘˘ ´                              ¯
                LinkX pΣq “ p´1 LinkX Σ ‹ ‹vPΣp0q LinkConepvq pΣ X Cone pvqq ;

hence LinkX pΣq is uniquely determined by the support simplex Σ, of which there are finitely many
                                                                            p0q
G-orbits, and by the choice of LinkConepvq pΣ X Cone pvqq for every v P Σ         , which can either be:
     ‚ Lv if Σ X Cone pvq “ tvu;
10                                     G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


      ‚ tvu if Σ X Cone pvq P Lv ;
      ‚ empty if Σ X Cone pvq is an edge.
                                                             p0q
Therefore there are three possible choices for every v P Σ         , and this concludes the proof that G ö X
has finitely many orbits of links.                                                                         □
As a special case of [BHMS24, Theorem 1.18], we get:
Corollary 2.5. A squid HHG is a hierarchically hyperbolic group.
2.2. Cusped space: the underlying graph. We construct cusped spaces by modifying squid HHSs
in a natural way; the idea is simply to replace each minimal coordinate space Cp∆v q with the combi-
natorial horoball over it. We now describe this procedure, starting with the combinatorial aspects.
Notation 2.6. Let pX, Wq be a relative squid HHS, with blowup data pX, tLv uvPX p0q q. Define X  p as
the blowup of pX, tLv ˆ Nu p0q q. We identify X with the blowup of pX, tLv ˆ t0uu
                            vPX
                                                                                      p0q q inside X.
                                                                                           vPX
                                                                                                   p
With a small abuse of notation, we still denote by p : X  p Ñ X the retraction mapping every cone to its
             Ó p                          p0q
apex. Let p¨q : X Ñ X map every v P X to itself, and every pn – pp, nq P Lv ˆ N to p P Lv .
   For every maximal simplex Θ “ pv, pmv qvPΘ of X,       p let Depth pΘq “ max
                                                                                    vPΘ mv . We also set
  `        mv
Θ “ pv, p qvPΘ|mv ą0 , which might be non-maximal.
                                                                                                   ` ˘
Lemma 2.7. If ∆ is a X-simplex
                         p         and x P X  p p0q , then x P Link x p∆q if and only if xÓ P LinkX ∆Ó .
                                                                   X
                       Ó          ` Ó˘
In particular LinkX
                  x p∆q “ LinkX ∆ .

Proof. By construction, two vertices x, y P X p p0q are X-adjacent
                                                        p          if and only if either ppxq “ ppyq and
one of x and y coincides with ppxq, or ppxq and ppyq are X-adjacent. The same characterisation holds
for X; therefore, since ppxÓ q “ ppxq, and similarly for y, we get that x P LinkX    x pyq if and only if
            ` ˘
xÓ P LinkX y Ó . Lemma 2.7 now follows by taking the intersections over all y P ∆p0q .                 □
                                                                                                 ` Ó˘
Corollary
       ` Ó ˘ 2.8. Let ∆, Σ be simplices of X. Then LinkX
                                           p             x p∆q Ď LinkX x pΣq if and only if LinkX ∆    Ď
LinkX Σ .
Proof. If LinkX
              x p∆q Ď LinkX
                          x pΣq then
                          ` ˘              Ó             Ó       ` Ó˘
                    LinkX ∆Ó “ pLinkX              x pΣqq “ LinkX Σ
                                     x p∆qq Ď pLinkX                  ,
                                                                                              ` Ó˘
where we
      ` Óinvoked
          ˘      Lemma 2.7 for the equalities. For the converse inclusion, assume
                                                                             `   ˘ that Link`X ∆
                                                                                               ˘ Ď
                                                         Ó                     Ó
LinkX Σ , and let x be any point in LinkXx p∆q. Then x belongs to LinkX ∆          Ď LinkX ΣÓ , and
              x pΣq by Lemma 2.7.
again x P LinkX                                                                                    □
2.3. Cusped space: edges between maximal simplices. Our goal is now to describe the graph
W              p Wq
x that makes pX,  x into a combinatorial HHS. Roughly, W
                                                       x “contains” the combinatorial horoballs
over the Ď-minimal domains of W.
Definition 2.9 (Cusped space). In the setting of Notation 2.6, let W x be the X-graph
                                                                                p     where two
maximal simplices Θ, Ξ Ď X span a W-edge if and only if one of the following happens:
                         p        x
                                                 p0q
     (a) Edge of cusp-type: There exist v P Θ         and pn , q m P Lv ˆ N such that Θ ´ Ξ “ tpn u,
                   m                        n m
         Ξ ´ Θ “ tq u, and dHorpCp∆v Ó qq pp , q q “ 1;
    (b) Edge of W-type: Θ` “ Ξ` , and ΘÓ is W-adjacent to ΞÓ .
The cusped space for pX, Wq is the pair pX,
                                         p Wq.
                                            x To avoid ambiguity, we denote augmented links in
 p Wq
pX,  x by Cp¨q.
           p

Remark 2.10. Edges of cusp-type will make sure a copy of the combinatorial horoball on every
minimal domain embeds inside W.x The purpose of the edges of W-type is twofold. On the one
hand, they shall ensure W embeds as a subspace of W;
                                                  x on the other hand, the horoballs will be “well
                                          CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                               11


separated”, meaning that if a point of W
                                       x projects deep in some horoball then it must project to the
base of any horoball on a transverse domain.
                       xp0q are W-adjacent,
Remark 2.11. If Θ, Ξ P W        x           then | Depth pΘq ´ Depth pΞq | ď 1 by construction.
2.4. Properties of the cusped space. We summarise the crucial properties of cusped spaces in
the following theorem, most importantly that cusped spaces of relative squid HHSs are squid HHSs
themselves.
Theorem 2.12. Let pX, W, n, δq be a relative squid HHS, and let pX,       p Wq
                                                                             x be its cusped space. Then
the following hold:
   (A) The inclusion X ãÑ X   p induces an injective coarse embedding i : W ãÑ W. x Moreover, the coarse
         embedding functions do not depend on any of the data.
   (B) There exists δ 1 , only depending on δ, such that pX,  x n, δ 1 q is a squid HHS.
                                                           p W,
   (C) Any action of a group G on pX, Wq extends to a G-action on pX,        p Wq.
                                                                                x
   (D) W is a hierarchically hyperbolic space relative to tCp∆v quvPX p0q .
Item (D), combined with Definition 2.3, readily implies the following:
Corollary 2.13. A relative squid HHG is a relative hierarchically hyperbolic group.
We break the proof of Theorem 2.12 into a series of propositions. Firstly, we prove a quantitative
version of Theorem 2.12.(A):
Proposition 2.14. (A) Let pX, Wq be a relative squid HHS. The inclusion X ãÑ X      p induces an
injective coarse embedding W ãÑ W. More precisely, for every two maximal simplices Θ, Ξ P W p0q ,
                                x
                                  mpdW pΘ, Ξqq ď dW
                                                  x pΘ, Ξq ď dW pΘ, Ξq,
                        1
where m is the inverse of the function n Ñ n2n .
Proof. Let Θ be a maximal simplex of X, which we can also see as a maximal simplex of X            p with
  `               Ó
Θ “ H and Θ “ Θ. Thus there is an injection W ãÑ W,            x which maps W-edges to W-edges x        of
W-type. Since W is an induced subgraph of W, the inclusion W ãÑ W is 1-Lipschitz.
                                                x                      x
                                                                                     D
   We are left to prove that, if Θ, Ξ P W p0q and D “ dWx pΘ, Ξq, then dW pΘ, Ξq ď D2 . To this extent,
let tΣ0 “ Θ, Σ1 , . . . , ΣD “ Ξu be a W-geodesic,
                                       x                                      Ó
                                                   and consider the path tΣ0 “ Θ, Σ1 Ó , . . . , ΣD Ó “ Ξu
in W.
Claim 2.15. For every i “ 0, . . . , D ´ 1, dW pΣi Ó , Σi`1 Ó q ď 2D .
Proof of Claim 2.15. If Σi and Σi`1 span an edge of W-type then Σi Ó and Σi`1 Ó are W-adjacent,
and therefore dW pΣi Ó , Σi`1 Ó q ď 1. Thus suppose
                                               ´    that
                                                       ¯ Σi and Σi`1 are joined by an edge of cusp-
                                    p0q
type, so that there exist v P X         and Hor Cp∆v Ó q -adjacent points pn , q m P Lv ˆ N such that
Σi ´ Σi`1 “ tpn u and Σi`1 ´ Σi “ tq m u. By inspection of Definition 1.1 there are two sub-cases to
analyse. If q m “ pn`1 then Σi Ó “ Σi`1 Ó , and we are done. Otherwise we must have that m “ n and
dCp∆v q pp, qq ď 2n , so there is a Cp∆v q-geodesic with vertices p0 “ p, p1 , . . . , pk “ q for some k ď 2n .
Since Lv ˆ N “ LinkX pΣi X Σi`1 q, Item (5) for pX, Wq then implies that Σi and Σi`1 are at distance
at most k ď 2n in W. But now n ď Depth pΣi q, which by Remark 2.11 is at most D ` Depth pΣ0 q “ D,
as required.                                                                                                ■
Proposition 2.14 now follows from the Claim, since
                                                D´1
                                                ÿ
                                  dW pΘ, Ξq ď         dW pΣi , Σi`1 q ď D2D .                                 □
                                                i`0

   1This function is known as the Lambert W             function, and      diverges   at   infinity.   See   e.g.
https://mathworld.wolfram.com/LambertW-Function.html for more details.
12                                      G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


Before proceeding with the proof of Theorem 2.12, we point out the following:

Lemma 2.16. The inclusion X ãÑ X                             p `W .
                               p induces an embedding X `W Ñ X                 x


Proof. Firstly, as mentioned at the beginning of the proof of Proposition 2.14, maximal simplices of X
                               p Moreover, if p, q P X belong to W-adjacent maximal simplices Φ, Ψ of
are also maximal simplices of X.
X, then Φ and Ψ are joined by an edge of W-type when seen as simplices of X  p (recall Definition 2.9.(b)).
This proves that the inclusion X ãÑ X induces a simplicial map X
                                        p                             `W
                                                                           ÑX p `W
                                                                                 x
                                                                                   , which is injective at
the level of vertices.
   To prove that the above map is an embedding, we are left to show that, if two vertices p, q belong to
W-adjacent
x            maximal simplices Σ, Θ of X, p respectively, then there exist W-adjacent maximal simplices
of X containing p and q, respectively.
   If Σ and Θ are joined by an edge of cusp-type, then Σ´Θ “ tpu, Θ´Σ “ tqu, and dHorpCp∆pppq qq pp, qq “
1. Since both p and q belong to X, this means that dCp∆pppq q pp, qq “ 1, so p and q belong to W-adjacent
maximal simplices of X.
   Otherwise Σ and Θ are joined by an edge of W-type, which means that ΣÓ and ΘÓ are W-adjacent.
Notice moreover that p P ΣÓ and q P ΘÓ because they lied in X, and we are done.                        □

We now prove that the cusped space is a squid HHS:
Proposition 2.17. (B) Let pX, Wq be a relative squid HHS. There exists δ 1 , only depending on δ,
              x n, δ 1 q is a squid HHS.
           p W,
such that pX,
Proof. In what follows, we say that a constant is uniform if it only depends on n and δ. We check that
each axiom from Definition 1.7 holds for some uniform constant δi , and we shall then set δ 1 “ maxi δi .
   Item (1) follows from Corollary 2.8 and the corresponding axiom for pX, Wq, with the same constant
n. Regarding Item (2), by the description of links in a blowup from Corollary 1.14, it is enough to
restrict to simplices of either blowup type or cone type. We analyse the two cases separately in
Claim 2.18 and Claim 2.19 below.
Claim 2.18 (Blowup type). Let Σ be a simplex of blowup type. There exists a 2-quasi-isometry
CpΣÓ q Ñ CpΣq.
           p     In particular, CpΣq
                                p    is δ1 -hyperbolic for some δ1 only depending on δ.
                                  ` ˘`W                                            ` ˘
Proof of Claim 2.18. Let LinkX Σ            be the graph obtained from LinkX Σ by connecting two
                                                                               ` ˘` W
                                                                                    x
vertices whenever they belong to W-adjacent simplices, and define LinkX Σ              analogously. By how
                                                                                ` ˘
we defined W-edges in Definition 2.9, we see that two vertices in LinkX Σ are W-adjacent if and
             x
                                         ` ˘`W               ` ˘`W  x
only if they are W-adjacent,
                  x            so LinkX Σ         and LinkX Σ          coincide. Now, since X is a blowup
                                                                                               ` ˘`W
of X and Σ is of blowup type, the retraction p induces a quasi-isometry CpΣÓ q Ñ LinkX Σ              , and
                               ` ˘`W
similarly the inclusion LinkX Σ        Ñ CpΣq
                                           p    is an isometric, 2-surjective embedding. By keeping track
of the quasi-isometry constants, one sees that the composition CpΣÓ q Ñ CpΣq  p    is a 2-quasi-isometry, as
required.                                                                                                 ■
                                                                                      p0q
Claim
   ´ 2.19¯(Cone type). Let ∆v be a simplex of cone type, for some v P X                     . Then Cp∆
                                                                                                   p vq –
Hor Cp∆v Ó q , and is therefore δ0 hyperbolic by Theorem 1.4.

Proof of Claim 2.19. The vertex set of Cp∆p v q is Lv ˆ N. By inspection of Definition 2.9, two distinct
                                                ´         ¯
vertices p , q P Lv ˆ N are adjacent in Hor Cp∆v Ó q if and only if they are connected in Cp∆
          n m                                                                                    p v q by

an edge of cusp-type. Hence we are left to prove that, if pn P Θ, q n P Ξ, where Θ, Ξ P W  x span an edge
of W-type, then pn and q n were already joined by an edge of cusp-type. Indeed, since Θ` “ Ξ` and
pn is not equal to q m , we must have that n “ m “ 0. But then p0 P ΘÓ and q 0 P ΞÓ are W-adjacent,
meaning that dCp∆v Ó q pp, qq “ 1 and therefore p0 , q 0 were already joined by an edge of cusp-type.   ■
                                            CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                        13


Item (3) is also proven by considering two cases, according to Corollary 1.14:
Claim 2.20 (Blowup type). There exists δ2 , only depending on δ, such that, if Σ is a simplex of
blowup type, then CpΣq
                  p    δ2 -quasi-isometrically embeds inside YΣ .

Proof of Claim 2.20. Notice first that every X-simplex
                                             p         with the same link as Σ must itself be of edge
type. This implies that YΣ is the p-preimage of ppYΣ q in X, p so p restricts to a 2-quasi-isometry
                                               Ó
YΣ Ñ ppYΣ q. The same arguments apply to Σ inside X, and notice that ppYΣ q “ ppYΣÓ q. Then the
δ-quasi-isometric embedding CpΣÓ q Ñ YΣÓ induces a uniform quasi-isometric embedding
                                ` ˘` W
                                     x        ` ˘`W
                           LinkX Σ     “ LinkX Σ    Ñ ppYΣÓ q “ ppYΣ q,

with constants only depending on δ, and in turn this induces a δ2 -quasi-isometric embedding CpΣq
                                                                                             p    Ñ YΣ
for some δ2 only depending on δ.                                                                     ■

Claim 2.21 (Cone type). There exists δ3 , only depending on δ, such that, if ∆v is a simplex of cone
                    p0q
type, for some v P X , then Cp∆
                            p v q δ3 -quasi-isometrically embeds inside Y∆ .
                                                                                               v


Proof of Claim 2.21. The fact that ∆v is of cone type implies that Y∆v is spanned by
                                               ď
                               pLv ˆ Nq Y            twu ‹ pLw ˆ Nq.
                                                    wPX´Starpvq

                                                              p `W
Y∆v uniformly retracts onto Y ∆v , defined as the subgraph of X
                                                                 x
                                                                   spanned by
                                          pLv ˆ Nq Y pX ´ Star pvqq.
                                             p `W
Let Y ∆v Ó be the subgraph of X `W (hence of X
                                                x
                                                  by Lemma 2.16) spanned by
                                          Lv ˆ t0u Y pX ´ Star pvqq.
Notice that, if pn P Lv ˆ N and w P X ´ Star pvq are W-adjacent,
                                                     x           then n “ 0, by how we defined
W-edges in Definition 2.9. Hence
x

(2)                                      Y ∆v “ Cp∆
                                                p v q YCp∆ Ó q Y ∆ Ó .
                                                          v       v


We shall now prove that Cp∆p v q is uniformly quasi-isometrically embedded in Y ∆ , and therefore in
                                                                                       v
Y∆v . Fix any Y ∆v -geodesic γ connecting two points a, b P Lv ˆ N, and we shall prove that its length
ℓpγq is bounded below by a linear function of dCp∆ p v q pa, bq. By Equation (2), γ can be decomposed as

a concatenation η1 ˚ λ1 ˚ . . . ˚ ηk , where each ηi is a geodesic in Cp∆
                                                                       p v q and each λj is a geodesic in
Y ∆v Ó with endpoints x0j , yj0 P Cp∆v Ó q. Furthermore, by Item (3) applied to pX, Wq, there is a constant
D “ Dpδq such that Cp∆v Ó q is D-quasi-isometrically embedded in Y ∆v Ó . Then
                                     0 0                    0 0
                            dCp∆
                             p v q pxj , yj q ď dCp∆v Ó q pxj , yj q ď Dℓpλi q ` D.

In turn, this means that
                                        k
                                        ÿ                k´1
                                                         ÿ
                                                                        0 0
                      dCp∆
                       p v q pa, bq ď         ℓpηi q `         dCp∆
                                                                p v q pxj , yj q
                                        i“1              i“1
                                        k
                                        ÿ                  k´1
                                                           ÿ
                                   ď          ℓpηi q ` D         ℓpλi q ` pk ´ 1qD
                                        i“1                i“1
                                          ˜                                   ¸
                                               k
                                               ÿ               k´1
                                                               ÿ
                                   ďD               ℓpηi q `         ℓpλi q       ` ℓpγqD “ 2Dℓpγq.      ■
                                              i“1              i“1
14                                        G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


Moving to the remaining items of Definition 1.7, the fact that X  p has cleanish intersections, which
follows from Lemma 1.16, implies Item (4) as in the proof of [BHMS24, Theorem 6.4] (more precisely,
at the beginning of the paragraph named “pX, W q is a combinatorial HHS ”).
   We finally address Item (5). Let Θ be an X-simplex
                                            p         and x, y P LinkXx pΘq be distinct vertices which
belong to W-adjacent maximal simplices Σx and Σy . If the latter span an edge of cusp-type then there
             p0q
                                                                                   x pΘq, we must have
exists v P X such that x, y P Lv ˆ N and dHorpCp∆v qq px, yq “ 1. Since x, y P LinkX
              ` ˘
that v P Star Θ , so Θ can be completed to two maximal simplices connected by an edge of cusp-type
and containing x and y, respectively. Suppose instead that Σx and Σy span an edge     ˘ W-type. Then
                                                                                   ` Óof
Σ`       `
  x “ Σy , and since x, y are distinct we must have that x, y P X, so x, y P LinkX Θ     by Lemma 2.7.
By Item (5) applied to pX, Wq, there exist two W-adjacent X-maximal simplices Πx Ě x ‹ ΘÓ and
                                                                                 Ó
Πy Ě x ‹ ΘÓ . If we call Ψx the X-maximal
                                  p          simplex such that Ψ`        `
                                                                  x “ Θ ad Ψx “ Πx , and we define
Ψy analogously, then Ψx Ě x ‹ Θ, Ψy Ě y ‹ Θ, and Ψx , Ψy span an edge of W-type. This concludes
the proof of Item (5), and in turn of Proposition 2.17.                                             □
Remark 2.22. If pX, Wq was a genuine squid HHS, not just a relative one, another approach to
proving Claim 2.21 would be to use that Y ∆v Ó is hyperbolic by [BHMS24, Proposition 3.3] (which is
the key step in the proof that a combinatorial HHS is indeed a HHS). This would give a closest-point
projection from Y ∆v Ó to its quasiconvex subset Cp∆v Ó q. For a relative squid HHS we cannot use
[BHMS24]; however, if Y ∆v Ó was hyperbolic relative to Cp∆v Ó q, we could still use that closest-point
projections to peripheral subsets of relatively hyperbolic spaces are coarsely Lipschitz (see [Sis13] for
general results about these projections).
   It can in fact be extracted a posteriori from our arguments and [BHMS24, Proposition 3.3] that
relative hyperbolicity indeed holds. Indeed, Y∆v is quasi-isometric to Y ∆v Ó with a combinatorial
horoball glued onto Cp∆v Ó q, and via [BHMS24, Proposition 3.3] we know that Y∆v is hyperbolic. This
implies that Y ∆v Ó is hyperbolic relative to Cp∆v Ó q, as this is one of the characterisations of relative
hyperbolicity.
Proposition 2.23. (C) Let G be a group acting on a relative squid HHS pX, Wq. Then the action
                          p Wq.
extends to a G-action on pX, x
                                    p0q
Proof. For every g P G, v P X , and pn P Lv ˆ N, set g ¨ pn – pg ¨ pqn P Lg¨v ˆ N, where g ¨ v is
the image of v under the action on X, seen as a subgraph of X. By inspection of Definition 2.9, this
induces an action on W;x furthermore, G still acts on X with finitely many orbits of simplices, and
                                         p Wq.
therefore we just defined a G-action on pX, x                                                     □
Proposition 2.24. (D) Let pX, Wq be a relative squid HHS. Then W is a hierarchically hyperbolic
space relative to tCp∆v quvPX p0q .
Proof. As in Definition 1.5, let S be the collection of „-equivalence classes of non-maximal simplices
of X, with the relations Ď and K as in Definition 1.8. It follows from Lemma 2.7 that the relations „,
Ď, and K are the same if we consider links in X or in X.p For every rΣs P S let CpΣq and CpΣq
                                                                                           p    be the
associated augmented links in pX, Wq and in pX, Wq, respectively.
                                                p  x
   For every rΣs P S, let πrΣs : Wx Ñ CpΣq
                                         p     be the projection from Definition 1.9. If Σ “ ∆v for
             p0q
some v P X , then Equation (2) shows that Cp∆v q separates Cp∆      p v q from the rest of Y∆ . As a
                                                                                              v
consequence, given w P W, its projection πr∆v s pwq must intersect Cp∆v q, since it is defined as the
                                                p v q. We then define π Ó : W Ñ Cp∆v q by setting
coarse closest point projection of w X Y∆v to Cp∆                         r∆v s
 Ó
πr∆ vs
       pwq “ πr∆v s pwq X Cp∆v q.
   If instead Σ is of edge-type, CpΣq
                                 p    and CpΣq are uniformly quasi-isometric, so we can always replace
one with the other (in the presence of a group action, we can also choose the quasi-isometry to be
                                              Ó
StabG pΣq-equivariant). Therefore we define πrΣs : W Ñ CpΣq as the composition of πrΣs , restricted to
W, with the fixed identification CpΣq
                                   p   Ñ CpΣq.
                                        CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                                 15


   We now prove that the data pW, S, Cp¨q, π Ó q make W a relative hierarchically hyperbolic space,
by checking the axioms of [Rus20, Definition 2.8] (which is equivalent to the original formulation
from [BHS19]). We shall often use without reference that, since pX,    p Wq
                                                                         x is a combinatorial HHS by
Proposition 2.17, then pW, S, Cp¨q, πq is a hierarchically hyperbolic space by [BHMS24, Theorem 1.18],
                         x      p
and therefore satisfies all axioms.
   All requirements only involving Ď and K, which only depend on X, follow exactly as in the proof
of [BHMS24, Theorem 1.18], so we focus on those involving projections and coordinate spaces.

                                                         Ó
   (1) (Projections.) For every rΣs P S, the coarse map πrΣs : W Ñ CpΣq is surjective since every
       vertex of CpΣq can be completed to a maximal simplex of X. If Σ is not of the form ∆v for
                    p0q    Ó
       any v P X   , then πrΣs is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz, as it is the composition of the coarsely
       Lipschitz map πrΣs : W Ñ CpΣqp    with the quasi-isometry CpΣq
                                                                    p        Ñ CpΣq. If instead Σ “ ∆v
       and w, w1 P W are W-adjacent, then dCp∆      pπ
                                              p v q r∆v s pwq, πr∆v s pw 1
                                                                           qq is uniformly bounded; hence
                 Ó           Ó
       dCp∆v q pπr∆ vs
                       pwq, πr∆ vs
                                   pw1 qq is uniformly bounded as well, since Cp∆v q is uniformly coarsely
       embedded in Cp∆   p v q by Lemma 1.3.
   (2) (Nesting and transversality.) Whenever rΣs, rΘs P S are such that rΣs Ĺ rΘs, there
                                                   rΣs
       exists a uniformly bounded subset ρrΘs P CpΘq,   p    defined as in Definition 1.9. Since rΘs is not
                                                                 rΣs
       Ď-minimal, CpΘq and CpΘq are quasi-isometric, so ρ
                       p
                                                               rΘs   is uniformly bounded in CpΘq as well.
                                                                                          p0q           rΣs
          Similarly, if rΣs&rΘs P S and Θ is not of the form ∆v for any v P X                   , then ρrΘs is
                                                                          rΣs
       uniformly bounded in CpΘq as well. If instead Θ “ ∆v then ρr∆v s P Cp∆v q, as it was defined
                                                      p v q. Hence ρrΣs is uniformly bounded in
       using the coarse closest point projection Y∆ Ñ Cp∆
                                                      v                      r∆v s
       Cp∆v q, as the latter is uniformly coarsely embedded in Cp∆
                                                               p v q.
   (3) (Consistency.) The consistency inequalities for pX,  p Wq
                                                               x impose uniform bounds involving
       certain π-projections in Cp¨q
                                 p and the relative projections between domains. As above, one can
       deduce analogous uniform bounds involving the corresponding π Ó -projections in Cp¨q, using the
       uniform coarse embeddings Cp¨q Ñ Cp¨q.
                                            p
                                                                                                  p0q
   (4) (Hyperbolicity of non-minimal domains) Whenever Σ ‰ ∆v for any v P X , CpΣq is
       uniformly quasi-isometric to the δ 1 -hyperbolic space CpΣq.
                                                                  p
                                                   1
   (5) (Bounded geodesic image.) Let w, w P W and rΣs, rΘs P S be such that rΣs Ĺ rΘs. Since
       CpΣq is uniformly coarsely embedded in CpΣq,  p      there exists a constant B “ Bpδ 1 q such that,
                  Ó         Ó     1
       if dCpΣq pπrΣs pwq, πrΣs pw qq ą B, then dCpΣq
                                                 p    pπrΣs pwq, πrΣs pw1 qq ą δ 1 . By the bounded geodesic
       image axiom for pX,   p Wq,
                                 x every CpΘq–geodesic
                                            p               from πrΘs pwq to πrΘs pwq must therefore pass
                      rΣs
       δ 1 -close to ρrΘs .
                                                Ó            Ó
          Now let γ be a CpΘq-geodesic from πrΘs   pwq to πrΘs pwq, and let γ
                                                                            p be its image under the
       quasi-isometry CpΘq Ñ CpΘq (here we are using that rΘs is not Ď-minimal). Then γ
                        p                                                                      p is a
       uniform quality quasi-geodesic, which is within uniform Hausdorff distance from a geodesic
       by the Morse lemma for hyperbolic spaces Morse lemma (see, e.g., [BH99, III.H.1.7]). Hence
                                         rΣs
       γ must pass uniformly close to ρrΘs , thus proving the bounded geodesic image property for
       pX, Wq.
   (6) (Partial realization.) Let trΣi su be a finite collection of pairwise orthogonal domains, to-
       gether with a choice of points pi P CpΣi qp0q . Since LinkX pΣi q Ď LinkX pLinkX pΣj qq for all
       i ‰ j, the points pi span a simplex in X, so they belong to a maximal simplex w P W p0q . As
       argued in the proof of [BHMS24, Theorem 1.18] (see [BHMS24, page 43]), w is a realisation
                                    p Wq,
       point for the collection in pX, x and therefore in pX, Wq since all coordinates pi were taken
       in CpΣi q.
16                                         G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


     (7) (Large links.) By the arguments from [Dur23, Section 4.8], it is enough to check the passing
         up axiom, as defined in e.g. [ABM` 25, Definition 4.1.(12’)]. The passing up axiom for pX,       p Wq
                                                                                                            x
         provides the existence of a function P : Rě0 Ñ Rě0 with the following property. Let t ě 0,
                                                                                             P ptq
         rΣs P S, and w, w1 P W. If dCpΘ          1     1
                                       p i q pw, w q ą δ for a collection of domains trΘi sui“1 Ď S nested

         in rΣs, then there exists a non-maximal simplex Ξ of X       p such that rΞs Ď rΣs, rΞs properly
                                                                                   ` Ó˘
                                               1
         contains some rΘi s, and dCpΞq
                                     p  pw, w q ě t. Since LinkX   x pΞq “ LinkX x Ξ , up to replacing Ξ
         by ΞÓ we can assume that Ξ Ď X.
            Now let E ě 0 be such that, for every rΘs P S, if dCpΘq pw, w1 q ą E, then dCpΘqp     pw, w1 q ą δ 1 ,
         which exists as CpΘq is uniformly coarsely embedded in CpΘq. p      Hence, if dCpΘ q pw, w1 q ą E for
                                                                                               i
                              P ptq                                             p Wq
         a collection trΘi sui“1 as above, then the passing up axiom for pX,      x produces a simplex Ξ
         as above, such that dCpΞq pw, w1 q ě dCpΞq
                                                p   pw, w 1
                                                            q ě t. This proves that the passing up axiom is
                                                                        1
         satisfied by pX, Wq, with the same function P and with δ replaced by E.
     (8) (Uniqueness.) If w, w1 P W p0q and r P Rě0 are such that dCpΣq pw, w1 q ď r for every rΣs P S,
         then dCpΣq
                 p   pw, w1 q ď dCpΣq pw, w1 q ď r. Then the uniqueness axiom for pX,     p Wq
                                                                                             x yields that
                   1
         dWx pw, w q ď θprq for some function θ : Rě0 Ñ Rě0 . In turn, since W ãÑ W is a coarse
         embedding by Item (A), dW pw, w1 q is also bounded in terms of r.                               □

                                              3. Some examples
   We now present some constructions of relative squid HHSs and HHGs, and describe the associated
cusped spaces; further examples (namely short HHG) will be discussed in Section 5.1 below.
3.1. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Here we first construct a relative squid HHG structure for
relatively hyperbolic groups (subject to natural finiteness conditions); then we recognise the associated
cusped space as the augmented space, in the sense of e.g. [Hru10, Definition 4.3].
Lemma 3.1. A finitely generated group G, which is hyperbolic relative to a finite collection P of
finitely generated subgroups, is a relative squid HHG.
Proof. Let S be a finite generating set for G, such that S X P generates P for all P P P, and let dS be
the associated word metric on G. We shall prove that G has a relative squid HHG structure pX, Wq,
where:
       ‚ X is the discrete graph whose vertices are cosets of the subgroups in P;
       ‚ for every g P G and P P P, LgP “ gP p0q ;
       ‚ For every g, g 1 P G, P, P 1 P P, x P gP and x1 P g 1 P 1 , the maximal simplices pgP, xq and
         pg 1 P 1 , x1 q span a W-edge if and only if dS px, x1 q ď 1.
It is clear that X has cleanish intersections. We now check the axioms from Definition 1.7. Item (1)
follows from Lemma 1.13 and the fact that X is discrete. For Item (2), CpHq “ X `W is isometric to
the coned-off graph, which is obtained from the Cayley graph Cay pG, Sq by adding a cone over each
coset of the peripherals, and is hyperbolic by e.g. [Hru10, Theorem 5.1]. We also notice that, for every
gP P G{P , Cp∆gP q – g Cay pP, S X P q.
   Moving to Item (3), Y∆gP “ X ´ tgP u retracts onto Cp∆gP q since there is a coarse closest point
projection G Ñ gP , which map other cosets of the peripherals to uniformly bounded sets (see e.g.
[Sis13, Theorem 2.14] and the arguments therein). Item (4) again follows from the fact that X has
cleanish intersections. Finally, if x, y P X belong to the link of a simplex Σ, then Σ “ tgP u for some
P P P and g P G, and Item (5) follows.
   We are left to check that the above defines a relative squid HHG structure for G. This is because G
acts cofinitely on the collection of cosets of peripherals; moreover, the action on X naturally extends
to an action on W, and the latter is isometric to Cay pG, Sq by construction.                         □
Recall from e.g. [Hru10, Definition 4.3] that the augmented space for pG, Pq is the graph obtained
from Cay pG, Sq by gluing a combinatorial horoball on gP whenever g P G and p P P.
                                        CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                           17


Lemma 3.2. In the setting of Lemma 3.1, the cusped space W
                                                         x is G-equivariantly isometric to the
augmented space.
Proof. This readily follows by how we constructed W-edges
                                                  x       in Definition 2.9.                            □
3.2. Most HHSs are squid. In [HMS26], together with Mark Hagen, we roughly proved that com-
binatorial HHSs are abundant among all HHSs: given a hierarchically hyperbolic space Z, whose
hierarchical structure S is subject to certain natural requirements, there is a combinatorial HHS
pX, Wq such that Z and W are quasi-isometric (see [HMS26, Theorem 3.15] for the statement and
[HMS26, Sections 3.1 to 3.4] for the requirements). Notably, from the description of the combinatorial
structure in [HMS26, Section 4], one can extract that pX, Wq is a squid HHS, where:
      ‚ the support graph X is the so-called minimal orthogonality graph, whose vertices correspond
        to minimal domains in the structure and edges correspond to orthogonality;
      ‚ for a minimal domain V P S, seen as a vertex of X, the augmented link of ∆V is quasi-isometric
        to the coordinate space CV .
In particular, if G acts on Z geometrically, and there is a “compatible” action on S with finitely many
orbits of collections of pairwise orthogonal domains, then G is a squid HHG.
Remark 3.3. As pointed out in [HMS26, Remark 3.17], in the proof of [HMS26, Theorem 3.15],
hyperbolicity of coordinate spaces for minimal domains in S is only ever used to show that certain
minimal augmented links are hyperbolic. In particular, the arguments there run verbatim to show
that a relative hierarchically hyperbolic space (resp. group), subject to the same assumptions on S
(and on the group action on it), is a relative squid HHS (resp. HHG).
3.2.1. Mapping class group and Teichmüller space. Here we specialise the above construction to the
mapping class group MCGpSq of a finite-type surface S, and recognise the associated cusped space as
the Teichmüller space of S. To do so, we must first delve into the various HHG structures for MCGpSq,
including the combinatorial one obtained from applying [HMS26, Theorem 3.15].
   By a surface we mean a connected, compact, oriented 2-manifold S with finitely many points
removed. Given a subsurface U of S which is not a pair of pants, the associated curve graph CpU q
is the simplicial graph whose vertices are isotopy classes of simple closed curves on U , and adjacency
corresponds to having disjoint representatives. There are two exceptions to this definition: if U is a
sphere with four punctures or a torus with a puncture, we define two curves to be adjacent if they
have the minimal intersection number, which is two on the sphere and one on the torus; if instead
U “ Av is an annulus with core curve v P CpSqp0q , we define its annular curve graph as the quasiline
from [MM00, Section 2.4].
   As explained in [BHS17b, Theorem G], the mapping class group MCGpSq admits a HHG structure
S where domains correspond to subsurfaces (up to isotopy), and where the coordinate space for a
subsurface is its curve graph (resp. annular curve graph if the subsurface is an annulus). Further-
more, [HMS26, Theorem 9.8] equips MCGpSq with a squid HHG structure pX, Wq with blowup data
pX “ CpSq, tCpAv quvPCpSqp0q q. By how W-edges are defined in [HMS26, Definition 4.10], unbounded
coordinate spaces correspond to (annular) curve graphs:
      ‚ Let v P CpSqp0q be a curve. Then Cp∆v q and the annular curve graph CpAv q have the same
         vertices, and the identity map is a quasi-isometry ϕ∆v : Cp∆v q Ñ CpAv q with uniform constants.
      ‚ Let Σ be a non-maximal simplex of CpSq, and let Σ Ď X be a simplex of blowup type whose
         support is Σ. If we see Σ as a collection of disjoint curves on S, its complement minus the pants
         components is an open subsurface UΣ . Then there is a StabMCGpSq prΣsq-equivariant quasi-
                                                                                                   ` ˘
         isometry ϕΣ : CpΣq Ñ CpUΣ q with uniform constants, mapping each curve w P LinkCpSq Σ to
         its subsurface projection ρAUΣ .
                                      w


To make notation compatible between the two bullets, for v P CpSqp0q we also denote Av by U∆v .
  Though we state them for mapping class groups for clarity of exposition, both Proposition 3.4
and Corollary 3.6 below hold in general for any combinatorial HHS structure obtained from [HMS26,
Theorem 3.15], as their proofs shall use no specific properties of mapping class groups. For the ease of
18                                       G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


notation, given a simplex Σ of X and two subsets A, B of either CpΣq or CpUΣ q, we shall write A „ B
to denote that diampA Y Bq is bounded independently on Σ.
Proposition 3.4. Let Σ be a simplex not of bounded type, and let v P pCpSq ´ SatpΣqqp0q . Then
                                                 ´      ¯
                                                     Av
                                      ppvq „ ϕ´1
                                               Σ   ρ UΣ ,

where p : YΣ Ñ CpΣq is the coarse closest point projection in pX, Wq, while ρA
                                                                             UΣ is the subsurface
                                                                               v


projection in S.
Proof. We split the proof in two cases, depending on whether Σ is of blowup type or of cusp type.
    Blowup type. Suppose first that Σ is of blowup
                                                 ` ˘    type. Let Π Ă CpSq be a (possibly empty)
simplex whose link contains both v and LinkX Σ , let Π be a simplex of blowup type supported
on Π, and let γ “ tv “ w0 , w1 , . . . , wn “ wu be a CpΠq-geodesic connecting v to a closest point
            Av
w P ϕ´1
      Σ pρUΣ q Ď LinkX pΣq. Since Π and Σ are both of blowup type, we can assume that the geodesic
lies entirely in CpSq. We proceed by induction on n “ dimpCpSqq ´ |Π|.
   Base case n “ 1. We first suppose
                                 ` ˘ that Π is almost-maximal. Therefore γ does not`intersect
                                                                                        ˘     the
saturation of Σ, because LinkCpSq Π is discrete while every point in SatpΣq X LinkCpSq Π would be
CpSq-adjacent to w. Then the bounded geodesic image for the combinatorial HHS structure (see e.g.
[Man24, Lemma 1.26]) shows that ppvq „ w. We now bound the projection of v and w to CpUΣ q.
Claim 3.5. ρA     Aw
            UΣ „ ρUΣ .
             v


                                                          A
Proof of Claim 3.5. The path γ 1 – ϕΠ pγq “ tρA           w1         Aw
                                                   UΠ , ρUΠ . . . , ρUΠ u is a quasi-geodesic in CpUΠ q with
                                                    v


uniform constants. Let η be a geodesic in CpUΠ q with the same endpoints, which by the Morse lemma
(see, e.g., [BH99, III.H.1.7]) must lie in a uniform neighbourhood of γ 1 . The bounded geodesic image
axiom in S implies that one of the following is true:
           Av
      ‚ ρU  Σ
              „ ρA
                 UΣ , and we are done;
                  w

                                                                                                Aw        Aw
      ‚ or η intersects a uniform neighbourhood of ρU                                1                        j
                                                         UΠ , and therefore so does γ . Let tρUΠ , . . . , ρUΠ u
                                                           Σ                                    i


        be the subsegment of γ 1 contained in this uniform neighbourhood. Since γ 1 is a quasigeodesic
        with uniform constants, the difference j ´ i is uniformly bounded. Furthermore, for every
                                          Aw
        k “ i, . . . , j, the projection ρUΣ k is well-defined, since the curve wi does not belong to the
        saturation of Σ and must therefore intersect UΣ . By how W-edges for the combinatorial
                                                                                Aw      Aw
        structure are defined in [HMS26, Definition 4.10], we have that ρUΣ k „ ρUΣ k`1 for every k “
                                                                                                  Aw
         i, . . . , j´1. Finally, again the bounded geodesic image theorem yields that ρAUΣ „ ρUΣ , because
                                                                                          v      i

                              1
         the segment of γ between these two points does not intersect the uniform neighbourhood of
                                                      Awj
         ρU                                                   Aw                                 Av
           UΠ ; the same argument shows that ρUΣ „ ρUΣ . Summing up, we again get that ρUΣ „ ρUΣ ,
             Σ                                                                                          Aw

         as required. See Figure 4 to understand the situation.                                          ■
                                   ´      ¯
Finally, notice that w „ ϕ´1    Σ    ρA
                                      UΣ
                                        w
                                            since the quasi-isometry ϕΣ maps w to ρA
                                                                                   UΣ . Summing everything
                                                                                    w


up, we proved that                                      ´     ¯       ´   ¯
                                   ppvq „ w „ ϕ´1
                                               Σ  ρAw
                                                   UΣ „ ϕ´1
                                                         Σ  ρA
                                                             UΣ .
                                                               v



Inductive step. Suppose now that Π is not almost maximal. If γ does not intersect the saturation of
Σ we conclude exactly as above; otherwise let γ X SatpΣq contain some curve x, which must be unique
because γ is a geodesic and w P LinkX pΣq Ď LinkX pxq. Let v 1 be the last vertex of γ before x. Since
the subsegment of γ between v and v 1 does not intersect the saturation of Σ, the arguments in the
                                                   Av 1
base case imply that ppvq „ ppv 1 q and ρAUΣ „ ρUΣ .
                                            v

                                              `         ˘                             A      A
   We now produce a vertex v 2 P LinkCpSq Π ‹ txu such that ppv 1 q „ ppv 2 q and ρUΣv1 „ ρUΣv2 . To this
                                                 1
extent, notice that the edge` of γ connecting
                                     ˘          v and x must either comes from CpSq or is a W-edge. In
the first case v 1 P LinkCpSq Π ‹ txu , so we set v 2 “ v 1 and we are done. In the second case, there are
                                           CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                                19




                           lk



                 lk



         Figure 4. On the left, the situation in LinkX pΠq. The geodesic γ (the dashed
                                                                    ` ˘`W               ` ˘
         line) only consists of W-edges, because it lies in LinkCpSq Π      and LinkCpSq Π is
         discrete. Furthermore, no point wi on γ belongs to the saturation of Σ.
         On the right, the image of γ under the quasi-isometry ϕΠ is a quasi-geodesic γ 1 ,
         which fellow-travels a geodesic η (here, the continuous line). The bounded geodesic
         image theorem implies that all segments of γ 1 outside a uniform neighbourhood of ρUΣ
                                                                                            UΠ
         (here, the dotted circle) have uniformly bounded projections to CpUΣ q. Furthermore,
         a uniformly bounded segment of γ 1 can intersect said neighbourhood, and any two
         points in this segment have close projections to CpUΣ q by how W-edges are defined in
         the combinatorial structure.

two W-adjacent maximal simplices Ψ, Ψ1 of X such that x `P Ψ                     1     1
                                                                        ˘ and v P Ψ . By Item (5) we can assume
                 1
that Ψ and Ψ both extend Π. Notice that Ψ X LinkCpSq Π is not entirely contained inside SatpΣq,
                                                             ` ˘                        `              ` ˘˘
since otherwise we would have that H ‰ LinkCpSq Σ Ď LinkLinkCpSq pΠq Ψ X LinkCpSq Π , and the
                                                                                             ` ˘
latter is empty because Ψ is maximal. Hence there exists v 2 P pΨ X LinkCpSq Π q ´ SatpΣq. Since v 1
and v 2 are adjacent in CpΠq and none of them belongs to SatpΣq, the above arguments, applied to the
                                                        A        A
geodesic tv 1 , v 2 u, show that ppv 1 q „ ppv 2 q and ρUΣv1 „ ρUΣv2 .
   Finally, since by construction v 2 and LinkX pΣq are both contained in the link of             ´ any¯blowup-type
                                                                                                    A
simplex supported on Π ‹ txu, the inductive hypothesis gives that ppv 2 q „ ϕ´1                Σ   ρUΣv2 . Summing
everything up, we proved that
                                                       ´       ¯        ´       ¯         ´     ¯
                                                          Av 2             Av 1              Av
                        ppvq „ ppv 1 q „ ppv 2 q „ ϕ´1
                                                    Σ   ρ UΣ     „ ϕ ´1
                                                                     Σ    ρUΣ      „ ϕ ´1
                                                                                       Σ   ρ UΣ .

Cusp type. The case where Σ “ ∆u for some u P CpSqp0q is dealt with similarly, so we focus on
highlighting the differences. As above, let Π be a simplex of blowup type whose link contains both v
                                                                                 Av
and LinkX p∆u q, and let γ be a CpΠq-geodesic connecting v to a point y P ϕ´1
                                                                           ∆u pρAu q. We can assume
that every vertex of γ belongs to CpSq, excluding y which lies in LinkX p∆u q. Suppose first that
γ X Satp∆u q “ H, which means that γ does not intersect LinkCpSq puq. Let v 1 be the last vertex of γ
before y. The bounded geodesic image theorem in pX, Wq yields that ppvq „ ppv 1 q. Furthermore, since
v 1 and y are joined by a W-edge, we have that ppv 1 q „ y. Hence
                                                                   Av
                                        ppvq „ ppv 1 q „ y „ ϕ´1
                                                              ∆u pρAu q.

   Thus suppose that γ X LinkCpSq puq “ txu. Let v 1 be the last point on γ before x, and let v 2 P
LinkCpSq pxq which is W-adjacent to v 1 and does not belong to LinkCpSq puq (again, v 2 can be found in
any maximal simplex containing x which is W-adjacent to a simplex containing v 1 ). Applying twice
the bounded geodesic image theorem in pX, Wq yields that ppvq „ ppv 1 q „ ppv 2 q; on the other hand,
                                                              Av           Av 1          Av2
the bounded geodesic image theorem in S implies that ϕ´1              ´1           ´1
                                                         ∆u pρAu q „ ϕ∆u pρAu q „ ϕ∆u pρAu q. We then
20                                       G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


repeat the whole argument for v 2 inside the link of any blowup type simplex supported on Π ‹ txu,
and we conclude by induction.                                                                   □

The following corollary of Proposition 3.4 roughly states that relative projections between domains in
the combinatorial structure, as defined in Definition 1.9, coarsely agree with relative projections in the
original structure S, which are defined using subsurface projections.
Corollary 3.6. Let Σ, Θ Ď X be simplices not of bounded type.
   (1) If rΘs&rΣs or rΘs Ĺ rΣs, then
                                                  ´     ¯
                                       rΘs
                                      ρrΣs „ ϕ´1
                                               Σ    ρU
                                                     UΣ ,
                                                      Θ



                 rΘs
         where ρrΣs is the projection in pX, Wq while ρU UΣ is the subsurface projection in S.
                                                           Θ


     (2) If rΘs Ľ rΣs and x P CpΘq, then
                                                     ´               ¯
                                       rΘs              UΘ
                                      ρrΣs pxq „ ϕ´1
                                                  Σ   ρ UΣ pϕ Θ pxqq   ,
                 rΘs
         where ρrΣs : CpΘq Ñ CpΣq is the projection in pX, Wq while ρU
                                                                     UΣ : CpUΘ q Ñ CpUΣ q is the
                                                                      Θ


         subsurface projection in S.
                             rΘs
Proof. (1) Recall that ρrΣs “ ppSatpΘqXYΣ q. If Θ “ ∆v for some v P CpSqp0q , then v P SatpΘqXYΣ , and
                                                                                                ´     ¯
        rΘs                                                                                        Av
since ρrΣs is uniformly bounded it must uniformly coarsely coincide with ppvq; then ppvq „ ϕ´1
                                                                                             Σ   ρ UΣ
by Proposition 3.4, and we are done since Av “ U∆v .
   If instead Θ is of blowup type, let v P Θ be such that the projection ρA UΣ is well-defined: such a
                                                                              v


vertex exists since every subsurface in S which is disjoint from Aw for all
                                                                          ´ w P¯ Θ must be nested in
                                                         rΘs
UΘ . Then, since w P SatpΘq X YΣ , we again have that ρrΣs „ ppvq „ ϕΣ ρA
                                                                       ´1
                                                                              UΣ . On the other hand,
                                                                                v


                                     Av
since Av and UΘ are not orthogonal, ρUΣ
                                        „ ρU
                                           UΣ by e.g. [DHS17, Lemma 1.5].
                                            Θ


                                   rΘs
   (2) If one of ρU
                  UΣ pϕΘ pxqq and ρrΣs pxq is empty, then then the diameter of their union is the maximum
                   Θ


of the diameters, which is uniformly bounded, and there is nothing to prove. We therefore assume
                                                      rΘs
that both subsets are non-empty. Recall that ρrΣs pxq is non-empty precisely when x P CpΘq X YΣ ,
                       rΘs
and in this case ρrΣs pxq “ ppxq. Furthermore, let v P CpSqp0q be such that x P Cone pvq. Then
ρU
 UΣ pϕΘ pxqq is non-empty precisely when Av intersects UΣ , or equivalently if v P YΣ , and in this
  Θ
                                                                                                    case
                                                                                                  ´    ¯
ρUΣ pϕΘ pxqq „ ρUΣ . Finally, ppxq „ ppvq, as v and x are adjacent in YΣ , and in turn ppvq „ ϕΣ ρA
 UΘ              Av                                                                            ´1    v
                                                                                                    UΣ
by Proposition 3.4. Combining the above yields that
                                                    ´     ¯       ´             ¯
                        rΘs
                       ρrΣs pxq “ ppxq „ ppvq „ ϕ´1
                                                  Σ   ρA
                                                       UΣ „ ϕΣ
                                                        v      ´1
                                                                    ρU
                                                                     UΣ pϕΘ pxqq .
                                                                      Θ
                                                                                                      □

We are now ready to prove that the cusped space for a mapping class group coincides with its Te-
ichmüller space. The core idea is that, since the two spaces admit HHS structures with the same
domains and coordinate spaces, and since relative projections between domains in the two structure
coarsely coincide by Corollary 3.6, the two spaces must essentially coincide, and indeed the Realization
theorem [BHS19, Theorem 3.1] produces an explicit quasi-isometry.
Proposition 3.7. Let S be a finite-type surface, and let MCGpSq be its mapping class group. The
cusped space for MCGpSq is MCGpSq-equivariantly quasi-isometric to the corresponding Teichmüller
space, equipped with the Teichmüller metric.
Proof. By [BHS17b, Theorem G], the HHS structure for Teich pSq with the Teichmüller metric has
the same domains and coordinate spaces as that for MCGpSq, except that each annular curve graph is
replaced by the combinatorial horoball over it. Relative projections are again defined using subsurface
projections, so they are the same as for MCGpSq.
                                       CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                           21


   Now let pX, Wq be the combinatorial HHG structure for MCGpSq, and let pX,    p Wq
                                                                                   x be the associated
cusped space. All projections between domains in W are defined using the coarse closest point pro-
                                                      x
jections YΣ Ñ CpΣq,
                p      which away from CpΣq
                                         p    restrict to the projections YΣÓ Ñ CpΣÓ q, as explained in
the proof of Proposition 2.24. In particular, relative projections between domains in pX, p Wqx coincide
with the corresponding relative projections in pX, Wq when restricted to X.
   We now define an equivariant quasi-isometry W x Ñ Teich pSq. For every w P W x , let bw – pπrΣs pwqq P
śp
   CpΣq be the tuple of its coordinates, where rΣs varies among all simplices not of bounded type.
The tuple bw is consistent, which roughly means that it satisfies certain inequalities relating co-
ordinates in bw and relative projections between domains (see [BHS19, Definition 1.17]). Now let
                            śp
ϕpbw q – pϕpΣ pπrΣs pwqqq P    CpUΣ q, where CpU
                                             p Σ q is the coordinate space for UΣ in the structure for
Teich pSq and ϕΣ : CpΣq Ñ CpUΣ q is the quasi-isometry induced by ϕΣ : CpΣq Ñ CpUΣ q. Notice that
                p    p        p
ϕpΣ is StabMCGpSq prΣsq-equivariant since ϕΣ is; hence the whole map ϕ is equivariant with respect
to the action of MCGpSq. Now Corollary 3.6 implies that ϕpbw q is again consistent, because relative
projections in the combinatorial structure and in the original structure coarsely coincide. In turn, the
Realization Theorem for consistent tuples [BHS19, Theorem 3.1] produces a point f pwq P Teich pSq
whose coordinates roughly coincide with ϕpbw q; furthermore f pwq is coarsely unique, meaning that
every point with the same properties is within uniformly bounded Teichmüller distance from f pwq.
   We just defined a MCGpSq-equivariant coarse map f : W   x Ñ Teich pSq, and we claim that is coarsely
                                1
Lipschitz. To see this, let w, w P W span an edge. Since coordinate projections are coarsely Lipschitz,
                                   x
and since each ϕpΣ is a quasi-isometry, we have that ϕpΣ pπrΣs pwqq „ ϕpΣ pπrΣs pw1 qq for all rΣs. Then
the uniqueness axiom [BHS19, Definition 1.1.(9)] implies that f pwq „ f pw1 q, as their coordinates are
uniformly close.
   The same arguments yield a coarsely Lipschitz, coarse map g : Teich pSq Ñ W  x , defined by mapping
                                                                 ´1           śp
each point x P Teich pSq to a realisation point for the tuple ϕΣ pπUΣ pxqq P      CpΣq. It is then clear
that f and g are quasi-inverses, thus proving that f is a quasi-isometry.                              □

Remark 3.8 (Comparison to the augmented marking complex). In the case of the mapping class
group of a surface S, our cusped space is nearly identical to the augmented marking complex AM pSq,
which is a simplicial complex quasi-isometric to the Teichmüller space of S constructed by Durham in
[Dur16, Section 3.2]. A vertex a of AM pSq is a complete clean marking, as in [MM00], together with
a choice of a non-negative integer for every curve of the base, which roughly records how short the
curve is in the hyperbolic metric associated to a. This data roughly corresponds to a maximal simplex
        x whose underlying simplex ΣpaqÓ is the marking and whose depths are given by the length
Σpaq P W,
data. Furthermore, edges of AM pSq come in two types: those coming from flip and twist moves of
the underlying markings, analogous to the elementary moves in the marking complex for the mapping
class group; and those corresponding to increasing the length data of a curve by one, thus moving
deeper in the associated horoball. This reflects the same dichotomy from Definition 2.9 between edges
of W-type and of cusp-type.
   Therefore, to show that our cusped space is quasi-isometric to the Teichmüller space, we could
have made the above analogy precise by proving that the coarse map Σp¨q : AM pSq Ñ W      x is a quasi-
isometry. However, we preferred to argue as above, both to avoid the technicalities arising for the fact
that vertices of W
                 x also include non-clean markings, and in order to develop the far more general tool
of Proposition 3.4.


                                      4. Controlling torsion
   The main result of this Section is Theorem 4.2, which roughly states that, if a group G has a
quotient G r which is a relative squid HHG, then every finite subgroup Fr ď G
                                                                            r either comes from a finite
subgroup of G or permutes a collection of orthogonal minimal domains. Crucially, this dichotomy
will follow from the fact that the Fr-action on the cusped space for Gr has a uniformly bounded orbit,
22                                      G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


which either lies in a coarsely embedded copy of G
                                                 r or inside a product of horoballs. We first recall a
definition.
Definition 4.1. Let G be a group and S a generating set. The injectivity radius of a quotient
π: G ↠ G r with respect to S, denoted injS π, is the maximum radius of a ball in Cay pG, Sq around
                                     ´       ¯
the identity which injects inside Cay G,
                                       r πpSq .

Theorem 4.2. For every n, δ, K ě 0 there exists ρ “ ρpn, δ, Kq ě 0 such that the following holds. Let
G be a group, S a finite generating set for G, π : G ↠ Gr a quotient, and Fr ď G r a finite subgroup.
Suppose that:
   (1) Gr has a relative squid HHG structure pX, W, n, δq;
                             ´       ¯
   (2) Some orbit map Cay G,   r πpSq Ñ W is a K-quasi-isometry;
    (3) injS π ě ρ.
Then either Fr fixes a non-empty simplex of X setwise, or is the isomorphic image under π of a finite
subgroup F ď G of order at most |S|ρ`1 .
Setting G “ G
            r in the above Theorem yields:
Corollary 4.3. For every n, δ, K ě 0 there exists N ě 0 such that the following happens. Let G have
a relative squid HHG structure pX, W, n, δq. Suppose that, for some finite generating set S of G, some
orbit map Cay pG, Sq Ñ W is a K-quasi-isometry. Then every finite subgroup of G of order greater
than |S|N must fix a non-empty simplex of X setwise.
Proof of Theorem 4.2. We shall progressively define constants E0 , . . . , E4 , all depending on n, δ, and
K only, and eventually set ρ “ 2E4 .
         p Wq
   Let pX,   x be the cusped space for pX, Wq, which is a squid HHS with constants n, δ 1 “ δ 1 pδq by
Proposition 2.17. By [HHP23, Theorem A], there exists E0 ě 0 such that W         x is E0 -coarsely injective.
We will not need the full definition of this property; it will suffice to know that, by combining [HHP23,
Proposition 1.1] and [Lan13, Theorem 1.2], every finite group acting by isometries on an E0 -coarsely
injective space has an orbit of diameter at most E1 , where E1 only depends on E0 . We stress that
the construction in [HHP23] ultimately depends only on the constants and functions appearing in
the definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic space [BHS19, Definition 1.1]; in turn, for the squid HHS
     x n, δ 1 q, the latter are defined in terms of n and δ 1 , as we pointed out in Remark 1.10. This
  p W,
pX,
proves that E0 , and in turn E1 , only depend on n and δ.
   Now let Fr ď G   r be a finite subgroup, which has an orbit of diameter at most E1 in W     x by coarse
injectivity. The idea we shall expand upon below is that either this orbit is far from W, and therefore
has “deep” projections to some cusps supported on a simplex of X, or Fr has a uniformly bounded
orbit in W, hence in G, and therefore its cardinality is uniformly bounded.
   Let Θ “ pv, pmv qvPΘ P W  xp0q be a maximal simplex such that diam x pFr ¨ Θq ď E1 . Since projections
                                                                           W
to coordinate spaces in W   x are uniformly coarsely Lipschitz, there exists E2 , depending on n, δ, and
E1 , such that for every simplex Σ of X, p
(3)                                       diamCpΣq
                                              p    pFr ¨ Θq ď E2 .
Now let
                                                       p0q
                                    V “ Fr ¨ tv P Θ | mv ě E2 ` 1u,
that is, the orbit of the supports where the depth of Θ is greater than E2 . We claim that any two
                                                                                 p0q           p0q
u, v P V are adjacent in X. Indeed, up to the action of Fr, assume that v P Θ and u P fr ¨ Θ for
some fr P Fr. If u and v were not adjacent, then the projection of fr ¨ Θ to Cp∆
                                                                             p v q would be contained
in Cp∆v q, and therefore
                         dp   pfr ¨ Θ, Θq “ d p
                          Cp∆v q                   pCp∆v q, pmv q “ mv ě E2 ` 1,
                                              Cp∆v q

contradicting the definition of E2 in Equation (3).
                                           CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                               23


   The above shows that V spans a simplex of X, which is preserved by Fr. If V ‰ H we are done, so
suppose otherwise. We will prove ´
                                 that Fr has
                                          ¯ uniformly bounded cardinality, by showing that it has
a uniformly bounded orbit in Cay G, πpSq . To see this, first notice that the cardinality of Θ is at
                                   r

most the dimension of X, which is bounded by n by Remark 2.2. Hence, by how we defined W-edges
                                                                                           x
in Definition 2.9, we see that                  ÿ
                                          Ó
                                  dW
                                   x pΘ, Θ q ď      mv ď nE2 ,
                                                           p0q
                                                       vPΘ

where we used that each mv is at most E2 since V is trivial. This proves that the Fr-orbit of ΘÓ has
diameter at most E1 ` 2nE2 in W;x in turn, by Proposition 2.14 the diameter of the same orbit in W is
                                                               ´       ¯
at most E3 – pE1 `2nE2 q2E1 `2nE2 . Since some orbit map Cay G,  r πpSq Ñ W is a K-quasi-isometry,
there exists a constant E4 depending on K and E3 (and so ultimately on K, n, and δ) and some r  hPGr
such that
                                    diamCaypG,πpSq
                                             r    q pF ¨ hq ď E4 .
                                                     r r
      r acts by isometries on its Cayley graph, this implies that the conjugate Fr1 – r
Since G                                                                                     h´1 Frrh is contained
in the ball of radius E4 around the identity of G.   r
   Now let ρ “ 2E4 , so that the ball B of radius 2E4 around the identity of G injects inside G;            r in
particular, πpBq contains Fr1 . Let F 1 – π ´1 pFr1 qXB, so that π restricts to a bijection between F 1 and Fr1 .
Notice that F 1 is contained in the ball B 1 of radius E4 around the identity, so |F 1 | ď |B 1 | ď |B| ď |S|ρ`1 .
Moreover F 1 is a subgroup: for every f, g P F 1 , the product f g still belongs to B, since
                      dCaypG,Sq pf g, 1q ď dCaypG,Sq pf, 1q ` dCaypG,Sq pg, 1q ď 2E4 “ ρ.
Hence f g is the unique preimage of πpf qπpgq P Fr1 inside B, and must therefore belong to F 1 . Summing
up, we proved that Fr1 is the isomorphic image under π of a subgroup of G of order at most |S|ρ`1 ;
in turn, since Fr1 “ r
                     h´1 Frr
                           h, for any h P G such that πphq “ r   h the subgroup F – hF 1 h´1 projects
                                           ρ`1
bijectively to F and has order at most |S| , as required.
               r                                                                                      □
We record an immediate application of Theorem 4.2 to relatively hyperbolic groups, which recovers
[DG18, Lemma 4.3].
Corollary 4.4. Let G be a finitely generated group which is hyperbolic relative to a finite collection
P “ tP1 , . . . , Pk u of finitely generated peripheral subgroups. For every i “ 1 . . . , k let Hi  Pi be a
normal subgroup, and let N “ xxHi yyi“1,...,k . There exist a finite subset F Ă G and a constant M ě 0,
both depending only on G and P, such that, if each Hi intersects F trivially, then any finite subgroup
of G{N is either:
      ‚ the isomorphic image of a subgroup of G of order at most M ;
      ‚ or is conjugated inside the image of a peripheral.
Proof. Let S be a finite generating set for G, and let δ0 ě 0 be a hyperbolicity constant for the graph
obtained from Cay pG, Sq by adding a cone over each coset of the Pi . Let ρ “ ρpδ0 , n “ 3, K “ 1q
be the constant given by Theorem 4.2. The relative Dehn filling theorem [Osi07, GM08] states that
there exists a finite subset F Ă G such that, if each Hi misses F, then G{N is hyperbolic relative
to πpPq “ tPi {Hi ui“1,...,k , and the injectivity radius of π : G Ñ G{N is at least ρ. Now, Lemma 3.1
endows G{N with a relative squid structure pX, Wq, where:
      ‚ W “ Cay pG{N , πpSqq;
      ‚ X is the discrete graph whose vertices are cosets of the Pi {Hi ;
      ‚ X `W is the graph obtained from Cay pG{N , πpSqq by adding a cone over each coset of the
        Pi {Hi .
In particular, pX, W, n, δq is a relative squid HHS, where n “ 3 and δ is the hyperbolicity constant of
X `W . In turn, up to enlarging F, we can ensure that the latter is bounded in terms of δ0 . This can
be deduced from [Osi07, Lemma 5.3], which gives a bound on the relative isoperimetric inequality for
24                                           G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


the quotient coned-off graph. Finally, notice that there is an isometry Cay pG{N , πpSqq Ñ W, which
in particular is a K-quasi-isometry with K “ 1. Hence Theorem 4.2 implies that any finite subgroup
of G{N of order greater than M – |S|ρ must fix a point of X, and is therefore conjugated inside a
peripheral.                                                                                      □

                5. Automorphisms of Dehn filling quotients of short HHGs
   In this Section we leverage Theorem 4.2 to control the automorphism groups of certain quotients
of short HHGs. These groups, introduced by the first author in [Man24], are a broad family of squid
HHGs including Artin groups of large and hyperbolic type, RAAGs on triangle- and square-free graphs,
graph manifold groups, and the mapping class group of a sphere with five punctures.

5.1. Background on short HHGs. We first recall the definition and some properties of short HHGs.
Definition 5.1. A short HHG is a group G admitting a combinatorial HHG structure pX, Wq such
that:
     (1) X is the blowup of a triangle- and square-free graph X, such that every connected component
         of X is not a point.
     (2) G acts on X with finitely many orbits of edges;
                             p0q                                           vp
     (3) For every v P X , there is an extension 0 Ñ Zv Ñ StabG pvq ÝÑ        Hv Ñ 0, where Hv is a
         hyperbolic group and Zv is a cyclic subgroup of StabG pvq acting trivially on LinkX pvq.
                            p0q
     (4) For every v P X           and g P G, Zgv “ gZv g ´1 .
                             p0q
     (5) For every v P X , Zv acts geometrically on Cp∆v q and with uniformly bounded orbits on
         Cp∆w q for every w P LinkX pvq.
                                                        p0q
X is called the support graph. For every v P X , we call Zv the cyclic direction for v. Moreover,
Item 5 implies that Cp∆v q is a quasiline if Zv is infinite, and is uniformly bounded otherwise.
Remark 5.2. Notice that short HHGs are squid HHGs by construction: X is a blowup of X, and the
latter has cleanish intersections simply because it does not contain triangles nor squares.
                                  p0q
Remark 5.3. If v, w P X        span an edge, and if Zv is infinite, then Zv and Zw commute. Indeed,
every g P Zw normalises Zv , so it acts on Zv as either the identity or the inversion swapping a generator
of Zv with its inverse. However the second possibility does not happen, since Zv acts loxodromically
on Cp∆v q while Zw acts with uniformly bounded orbits, and therefore cannot “flip” a quasiaxis for Zw .
Definition 5.4. A short HHG G, with support graph X, is colourable if there exists a partition of the
vertices of X into finitely many colours, such that no two adjacent vertices share the same colour, and
the G-action on X preserves the partition. This property, which is a special case of the general notion
of a colourable HHG (see e.g. [HP22, Section 3]), is satisfied by most known short HHGs, including
all the examples mentioned at the beginning of this section.
5.2. Dehn filling quotients. We now clarify which quotients of short HHGs we are interested in.
Notation 5.5. Let G be a colourable short HHG with support graph X, as in Definition 5.1. Suppose
that all cyclic directions tZv uvPX p0q are infinite.
   For every N P Ną0 let DTN “ xN Zv yvPX p0q , which is a normal subgroup of G, and let GN –
G{DTN the associated Dehn Filling quotient, with quotient map πN : G Ñ GN . Set X N – X{DTN ,
                      p0q
and for every v P X      let vN be its image in X N . Let ZvN – Zv {pDTN X Zv q, and let HvN –
StabGN pvN q {ZvN . Given any short HHG structure pX, Wq with support graph X, set XN – X{DTN
and WN – W{DTN .
   We say that a property P holds if N is deep enough if there exists N0 such that, whenever N is a
non-trivial multiple of N0 , GN satisfies P .
                                       CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                           25


For the whole Section, we always work under Notation 5.5. We now collect and expand results from
[MS26], our main goal being to show that deep enough Dehn filling quotients fit the framework of
Theorem 4.2.
Lemma 5.6 ([MS26, Corollary 3.40]). The injectivity radius of πN : G Ñ GN (with respect to any
finite generating set for G) goes to infinity for N deep enough and N Ñ 8.
The following proposition summarises the structure of deep enough Dehn filling quotients of a short
HHG, and it is essentially contained in [MS26]. The last item is the most subtle one; while it describes
bounded coordinate spaces in the HHS structure, we will need to keep track of these (and especially of
their diameters as a function of N ) to obtain uniformity results for sequences of deep enough quotients.
Proposition 5.7. There exists a short HHG structure pX, Wq for G, with support graph X, such that
the following hold if N is deep enough:
     (i) GN has a short HHG structure pXN , WN q.
                         p0q
   (ii) For every v P X , ZvN acts trivially on LinkX N pvN q, it is normal in StabGN pvN q, and the
        quotient HvN – StabGN pvN q {ZvN is hyperbolic.
                        p0q
  (iii) For every v P X , Cp∆vN q is quasi-isometric to Cp∆v q{N Zv , and the quasi-isometry constant
        does not depend on N .
Proof. Let pX 1 , W 1 q be any short HHG structure for G, with support graph X. Arguing exactly as
in [MS26, Section 4.1], one can find a natural number N0 and a new short HHG structure pX, Wq
                           p0q
such that, for every v P X , the subgroup xN0 Zw ywPLinkX pvq acts on Cp∆v q with uniformly bounded
orbits. This shows that, if N is deep enough (and in particular a multiple of the above N0 ), then
xN Zw ywPLinkX pvq acts on Cp∆v q with uniformly bounded orbits, and the bound is independent on N .
   Next, [MS26, Theorem 4.1] proves that pXN , WN q is a short HHG structure for GN , thus yielding
Item (i). Furthermore, Item (ii) is [MS26, Lemma 3.42].
   Finally, [MS26, Lemma 4.15] identifies Cp∆vN q with Cp∆v q{pDTN X StabG pvqq (which is denoted
by Lrvs there). In turn, since we modified the structure in such a way that xN Zw ywPLinkX pvq acts on
Cp∆v q with uniformly bounded orbits, the space Cp∆v q{pDTN XStabG pvqq is uniformly quasi-isometric
to Cp∆v q{N Zv , and this proves Item (iii).                                                         □
The quotients GN are all hyperbolic, and non-elementary unless G was either virtually cyclic or a
product:
                                                                                                  `W
Lemma 5.8. The following holds if N is deep enough. If G is not virtually cyclic and X                 is
unbounded, then GN is non-elementary hyperbolic.
Proof. This is simply [MS26, Corollary 4.22]. We stress that, with the notation from the proof of
Proposition 5.7, it does not matter if we consider the augmented graph in the original structure
pX 1 , W 1 q or in the new one pX, Wq, since by [BHS17a, Corollary 2.9] both spaces are quasi-isometric
to the space obtained from a Cayley graph of G after coning off all cosets of X-vertex stabilisers. □
On the one hand, the hyperbolicity constant of GN (meaning, of a Cayley graph with a fixed generating
set coming from G) must grow as N goes to infinity, as Lemma 5.15 below shows that GN contains
larger and larger cyclic subgroups. However, the HHG structures for the quotients are actually uniform,
except for the minimal coordinate spaces:
Lemma 5.9. There exist n, δ ě 0 such that, if N is deep enough, then pXN , WN , n, δq is a relative
squid HHS.
Proof. This is [MS26, Remark 4.8]. Roughly, the only coordinate spaces for the quotient whose hy-
perbolicity constants depend on N are the quotients Cp∆v q{N Zv , which look like circles of diameter
growing linearly in N .                                                                            □
As an immediate consequence, we get:
26                                      G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


                                                                                        pN , W
Corollary 5.10. Let G be as in Notation 5.5. For all deep enough N , the cusped spaces pX    xN q
are uniform squid HHSs, in the sense of Remark 1.10.
We can sum the previous results up to get the following control on torsion elements in deep enough
Dehn filling quotients:
Corollary 5.11. Let G be as in Notation 5.5. If N is deep enough, then every finite subgroup Fr ď GN
satisfies one of the following:
       ‚ Fr fixes a vertex of X N , or a pair of adjacent edges;
       ‚ There exists a finite subgroup F ď G such that πN : G Ñ GN restricts to an isomorphism
         F Ñ Fr.
Proof. It is enough to check that the quotient πN : G Ñ GN satisfies the assumptions of Theorem 4.2
whenever N is deep enough. Fix a finite generating set S for G, and let pX, Wq be the short HHG
structure given by Proposition 5.7. Fix w P W p0q , and let K ě 0 be such that the orbit map
ϕ : Cay pG, Sq Ñ W sending g to g ¨ w is a K-quasi-isometry. Since ϕ is G-equivariant, the orbit
map Cay pGN , πN pSqq Ñ WN sending πN pgq to πN pgq ¨ wN is also a K-quasi-isometry (here wN is
the image of w in WN ). Furthermore, by Lemma 5.9 there exist constants δ and n, not depending on
N , such that pXN , WN , n, δq is a relative squid HHS whenever N is deep enough. Finally, Lemma 5.6
states that the injectivity radius of G Ñ GN diverges as N Ñ 8.                                   □
We can also control torsion elements in HvN , as the following results recognise HvN as a quotient of
Hv satisfying the requirements of Corollary 4.4:
                                                        p0q
Lemma 5.12 ([Man24, Lemma 2.17]). Let v P X , and let U Ď LinkX pvq be any collection of
StabG pvq-orbit representatives. Then Hv is hyperbolic relative to the collection tEpZu quuPW , where
EpZu q is the maximal virtually cyclic subgroup containing qpZu q.
                                                                                                p0q
Lemma 5.13 ([MS26, Lemma 3.42]). The following holds if N is deep enough. Let v P X , and let
q : StabG pvq Ñ Hv be the quotient map. Then HvN is the quotient of Hv by xN qpZu qyuPLinkX pvq .
Combining Lemma 5.13 with Corollary 4.4 we get:
                                                                                 p0q
Corollary 5.14. The following holds if N is deep enough. For every v P X , every finite subgroup
of HvN either comes from a finite subgroup of Hv , or belongs to the image of EpZw q for some w P
LinkX pvq, and therefore fixes wN .
5.2.1. Cyclic directions for the quotient. For later purposes, we gather here a few more lemmas about
Dehn filling quotients, again working in the setting of Notation 5.5. The first lemma describes the
image of cyclic directions in the quotient.
                                                                                 p0q
Lemma 5.15. The following holds if N is deep enough. For every v P X                   , DTN X StabG pvq “
xN Zw ywPStarpvq and DTN X Zv “ N Zv . In particular, ZvN – Z{N Z.
Proof. The first conclusion is [MS26, Corollary 3.36]. For the second equality let g P DTN X Zv . Since
Zv ď StabG pvq, by the first conclusion g P xN Zw ywPStarpvq ; moreover N Zv is normal in StabG pvq, so
we can write g “ hg 1 where h P N Zv and g 1 P xN Zw ywPLinkX pvq X Zv . If g 1 is trivial we are done, so
suppose otherwise towards a contradiction. By [MS26, Corollary 3.37] we have
                                      xN Zw ywPLinkX pvq “ ˚ N Zu ,
                                                              uPJ
where J is a certain (possibly infinite) subset of LinkX pvq. If J consists of a single vertex w then
g 1 P N Zw X Zv , and therefore this intersection is non-trivial. This is a contradiction, because the two
cyclic directions have different actions on the quasiline Cp∆v q by Definition 5.1.(5). Thus suppose that
J contains more than a vertex, and therefore xN Zw ywPLinkX pvq is a non-abelian free group. Since Zv
is normal in StabG pvq, the square power of g 1 lies in the centre of xN Zw ywPLinkX pvq , which is trivial;
in turn, since a non-abelian free group has no torsion, g 1 itself must be trivial, against our initial
assumption.                                                                                               □
                                            CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                                  27


5.2.2. Commuting elements. Next, we prove that commuting elements of GN cannot have large dis-
placements on transverse lines: this is an instance of a more general principle that holds for all HHG.
For the following statement, the minimum displacement of an isometry g of a metric space S is defined
as inf xPS dS px, gxq.

Lemma 5.16. There exists E     r ą 0, only depending on G, such that the following holds if N is deep
                           i     p0q                ` i ˘
enough. For i “ 1, 2 let vN P X N and gi P StabGN vN      . Suppose that the minimum displacement of
                                                                 ` ˘
gi on Cp∆i q is at least E.
                         r If g1 and g2 commute then v 1 P Star v 2 .
                                                       N           N
                                             1      2
Proof. Towards a contradiction, assume that vN and vN are not adjacent, so that they yield transverse
                                                 r∆v1 s                                r∆v2 s
                                  1                          2
           1 s and r∆v 2 s. Let r
domains r∆vN                     2 – ρr∆ 2 s Ă Cp∆vN
                                                   2 q and r
                                                            1 – ρr∆ 1 s Ă Cp∆vN
                                                                              1 q be the relative
                                         N                          N
                      N                            v                                     v
                                                       N                                     N
projections between these two transverse domains. Since pXN , WN , n, δq is a relative squid HHS, there
exists a constant E “ Epn, δq ą 0, not depending on N , such that the following hold:
      ‚ Both r21 and r12 have diameter
                                !      at most E (this is [BHS19,
                                                             ) Definition 1.14.(1)]).
      ‚ For every q P WN , min dCp∆v1 q pq, r12 q, dCp∆v1 q pq, r21 q ď E (this is the Behrstock inequality,
                                            N                      N
        [BHS19, Definition 1.14.(4)]).   !                                      )
      ‚ There exists p P WN such that max dCp∆v1 q pp, r12 q, dCp∆v1 q pp, r21 q ď E (this follows from
                                                                   N               N
                                                                                                  2
        the partial realisation axiom [BHS19, Definition 1.14.(8)], applied to the pair pr∆vN
                                                                                            1 s, r q).
                                                                                                  1

Now set E
        r “ 4E, and let g1 , g2 P GN be as in the statement. Notice first that, for p as in the third
bullet,
         dCp∆v1 q pr12 , g1 pq ě dCp∆v1 q pp, g1 pq ´ dCp∆v1 q pp, r12 q ´ diampr12 q ě 4E ´ E ´ E “ 2E,
               N                      N                        N


so the Behrstock inequality yields that dCp∆v2 q pr21 , g1 pq ď E.             If we now consider the action of g2 on
                                                           N
Cp∆vN
    2 q, the same reasoning yields



             dCp∆v2 q pr21 , g2 g1 pq ě dCp∆v2 q pg1 p, g2 g1 pq ´ dCp∆v2 q pg1 p, r21 q ´ diampr21 q ě 2E.
                   N                         N                             N

                                                                                        1      2
However g2 g1 p “ g1 g2 p, so if in the above argument we swap the roles of vN            and vN , and of g1 and
g2 , we get that
                              dCp∆v1 q pr12 , g2 g1 pq “ dCp∆v1 q pr12 , g1 g2 pq ě 2E,
                                      N                                N

contradicting the Behrstock inequality for q “ g2 g1 p.                                                            □

Corollary 5.17. The following hold if N is deep enough. For i “ 1, 2 let tv i , wi u be edges of X.
                                                                                 1
                                                                                         ` 2˘
   (1) If there exist commuting elements g1 P ZvN       1 and g2 P Zv 2 , then v
                                                                       N         N P Star vN .
   (2) If there exist commuting elements g1 P xZvN        1 , Zw 1 y ´ pZv 1 Y Zw 1 q and g2 P xZv 2 , Zw 2 y ´
                                                                N         N        N              N      N
           2 Y Zw 2 q, then tv
                               1     1        2     2
       pZvN        N           N , wN  u “ tv N , wN  u.
                            p0q
Proof. For every u P X , Zu acts Ru -coboundedly on Cp∆u q for some Ru ě 0, and since there
are finitely many G-orbits of vertices in X there is a uniform bound R on all Ru . Furthermore, by
Proposition 5.7.(iii), each Cp∆uN q is uniformly quasi-isometric to Cp∆u q{N Zu , so ZuN acts on Cp∆uN q
R1 -coboundedly for some constant R1 depending on R but not on N . The same Proposition 5.7.(iii)
implies that the diameter of Cp∆uN q grows linearly in N . Since neither R1 nor the constant E    r from
Lemma 5.16 depend on N , we can find a constant M , again not depending on N , such that if g P ZuN
has minimum displacement less than E     r on Cp∆u q, then g “ πN pz k q for some |k| ď M , where zu
                                                    N                  u
generates Zu .
   Now, if N ą 4M , every g P ZuN has a power outside tπN pzuk quk“´M,...,M . This shows that, for N
deep enough, any two elements g1 , g2 as in Item 1 admit powers with minimum displacement at least
Er on the corresponding coordinate spaces, and now we can conclude by Lemma 5.16.
28                                         G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


    The argument for Item 2 is similar: given v i , wi , and gi as in the statement, it is enough to show that,
for i “ 1, 2, gi has a power acting with minimum displacement at least E        r on both Cp∆vi q and Cp∆wi q,
                                                                                                 N               N
                                                      3
provided that N is deep enough that N ą 4M . For ease of notation we drop the indices and denote
v 1 “ v, w1 “ w, and g1 “ g (the argument for i “ 2 is identical). Suppose that g “ πN pzvr zw       s
                                                                                                        q, for some
                                                                            k h
´N {2 ă r, s ă N {2 and r, s ‰ 0. If g already lies outside tπN pzv zw quk,h“´M,...,M then it acts with
minimum displacement at least E      r on both Cp∆v q and Cp∆w q, and we conclude as above. Otherwise
                                                        N             N
suppose that |r| ď M , and look at g M “ πN pzvrM zw       sM
                                                              q, so that M ă |rM mod N | ď M 2 . There are
now three sub-cases to consider. If |sM mod N | ą M we are done. If 0 ă |sM mod N | ď M then
    2             2
                     sM 2
g M “ πN pzvrM zw         q lies outside tπN pzvk zw
                                                   h
                                                     quk,h“´M,...,M by our choice of N . Finally, if sM “ 0
                           2           M `1           rpM `1q s
mod N then |s| ě 4M ą M , so g              “ πN pzv         zw q lies outside tπN pzvk zw
                                                                                         h
                                                                                           quk,h“´M,...,M .        □

From Corollary 5.17 we can also extract that cyclic directions can be algebraically distinguished from
products of adjacent cyclic directions:
Corollary 5.18. The following holds if N is deep enough. Let v, w be X-adjacent vertices of valence
greater than one, and let x P xZvN , ZwN y. Then x P ZvN Y ZwN if and only if its centraliser CGN pxq
is infinite.
Proof. We first notice that, under the above assumption, Hv is non-elementary hyperbolic. To see this,
let u P LinkX pvq ´ twu, which exists as v has valence greater than one. If Hv was virtually cyclic then
Zu would intersect xZv , Zw y non-trivially. This is impossible since xZv , Zw y fixes w while no element
in Zu does: indeed, every element in Zu acts loxodromically on Cp∆u q, and therefore cannot fix the
projection of w to Cp∆u q.
   Moving to the proof of the Lemma, we first suppose without loss of generality that x P ZvN . Then
CGN pxq contains the index-two subgroup of StabGN pvN q centralising ZvN , so it is enough to prove
that StabGN pvN q is infinite. In turn, the latter fits into an extension
                                    0 Ñ ZvN Ñ StabGN pvN q Ñ HvN Ñ 0,
so we are left to prove that HvN is infinite. Lemma 5.13 describes HvN as a relative hyperbolic Dehn
filling of the non-elementary hyperbolic group Hv ; hence, by [Osi07, Corollary 1.6], if N is deep enough
then HvN is non-elementary hyperbolic, and in particular infinite.
    For the converse implication, let x P xZvN , ZwN y ´ pZvN Y ZwN q, and let g P CGN pxq. Then
x “ gxg ´1 P xZgpvN q , ZgpwN q y ´ pZgpvN q Y ZgpwN q q, by how cyclic directions behave under conjugation;
thus Corollary 5.17.(2) implies that g fixes tvN , wN u setwise. This proves that CGN pxq is virtually
contained in StabGN pvN q X StabGN pwN q, which in turn virtually coincides with the finite subgroup
xZvN , ZwN y – ZvN ˆ ZwN by [MS26, Corollary 2.17].                                                       □

5.3. Extracting combinatorial data from automorphisms. We now prove that group automor-
phisms of GN induce simplicial automorphisms of X N :
Theorem 5.19. Let G be a colourable short HHG as in Notation 5.5. Suppose further that X has no
valence-one vertices. There exists an integer M , only depending on G, such that the following holds
if N is deep enough. Every group automorphism ϕ P Aut pGN q induces a simplicial automorphism
         `    ˘                           p0q
ϕ# P Aut X N such that, for every v P X , ϕ# pvN q is the unique vertex of X N satisfying
                                            ϕpM ZvN q “ M Zϕ# pvN q .
                                                                    p0q
Proof. Let ϕ be an automorphism of GN . For every v P X , ZvN – Zv {pDTN X Zv q is isomorphic
to Z{N Z by Lemma 5.15, and therefore ϕpZvN q – Z{N Z since ϕ is an automorphism. Let g generate
ϕpZvN q. Our next goal is to invoke Corollary 5.11 to show that a uniform power of g fixes an edge of
X N ; later we will choose ϕ# pvN q as one of the endpoints of such edge.
Claim 5.20. There exists M P N, only depending on G, such that the following holds for deep enough
N . There exist X-adjacent vertices v 1 , w1 such that g M P xZvN
                                                                1 , Zw 1 y.
                                                                      N
                                               CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                       29


Proof of Claim 5.20. Firstly, recall that a hierarchically hyperbolic group contains finitely many conju-
gacy classes of finite subgroups, by [HHP23, Theorem G]. In particular, we can choose N deep enough
that G contains no subgroup isomorphic to Z{N Z. Hence, by Corollary 5.11 there exists a non-empty
simplex Σ of X which is preserved by ϕpZvN q. Notice that X N is triangle-free, and therefore Σ is
                                                                          p0q
either a single vertex or an edge; either way, there exists v 1 P X such that g 2 P StabGN pvN     1
                                                                                                     q.
                          1                        1
   Now let q : StabGN pvN q Ñ HvN   1 – StabGN pvN q {ZvN 1 be the quotient map. By Corollary 5.14 there

exists a constant M 1 such that either qpg 2 q has order at most M 1 , or qpg 2 q P EpZw1 q{N Zw1 for some
                                           1
w1 P LinkX pv 1 q. In the former case g 2M P ZvN                       1
                                                 1 ; in turn, since M only depends on the isomorphism

type of Hv1 , of which there are finitely many since G acts cofinitely on the vertices of X, there exists a
power of g, only depending on G, which belongs to ZvN     1 . In the latter case, since Zw 1 has finite-index

in EpZw1 q, a uniform power of qpg 2 q must belong to qpZw1 q, and again we can choose this power to not
depend on either v 1 or w1 as there are finitely many G-orbits of edges in X.                              ■
Now, since X has no valence-one vertices, Corollary 5.18 yields that the centraliser of any element in
ZvN is infinite, and the same must be true for ϕpZvN q as ϕ is an isomorphism. In particular g M has
infinite centraliser, and again Corollary 5.18 implies that g M P Zϕ# pvN q where ϕ# pvN q is either vN 1
     1
or wN . Notice moreover that, since M does not depend on N , we can choose N to be a multiple of
M . Then xg M y “ ϕpM Zv q is a subgroup of Zϕ# pvN q – Z{N Z of order N {M , and it must therefore
coincide with M Zϕ# pvN q .
   We also point out that ϕ# pvN q is unique. Indeed, suppose towards a contradiction that g M P ZvN     2
           2
for some vN ‰ ϕ# pvN q, so that Zϕ# pvN q X ZvN2 have a non-trivial intersection. Corollary 5.17.(1) would
                    2                                   2 would act geometrically on Cp∆v 2 q and with
then imply that vN     P LinkX N pϕ# pvN qq; but then ZvN                                     N
uniformly bounded orbits on Cp∆ϕ# pvN q q, contradicting the existence of a non-trivial intersection.
   We are left to prove the following:
Claim 5.21. Whenever N is deep enough, ϕ# : X Ñ X is a graph isomorphism.
Proof of Claim 5.21. It is enough to prove that ϕ# maps edges to edges, since then the same argument
applied to ϕ´1 will produce an inverse fof ϕ# . Hence let vN , wN be X N -adjacent. By Remark 5.3, the
subgroups M ZvN and M ZwN commute, and therefore M Zϕ# pvN q and M Zϕ# pwN q must commute as
well. Now Corollary 5.17 shows that ϕ# pvN q P Star pϕ# pwN qq; moreover, since cyclic directions have
trivial intersection, we get that ϕ# pvN q, ϕ# pwN q are X N -adjacent, as required.                ■
The proof of Theorem 5.19 is now complete.                                                                 □
We now apply the above theorem to the extended mapping class group of a five-punctured sphere
(where we allow orientation-reversing mapping classes) to prove an analogue of a celebrated theorem
of Ivanov [Iva97]:
Corollary 5.22. Let G “ MCG ˘ pS5 q be the extended mapping class group of a five-holed sphere. If
N is deep enough, then Aut pGN q “ GN .
Proof. We first check that G fits the framework of Theorem 5.19. Indeed, in [Man24, Section 2.3.1]
the first author argued that G admits a colourable short HHG structure, where:
       ‚ the support graph X is the curve graph, which has no valence-one vertices;
       ‚ cyclic directions are the infinite subgroups generated by half Dehn twists.
Now let GN Ñ Aut pGN q be the natural map, sending every element to the corresponding inner
automorphism, and we want to show that this map      `    ˘is an isomorphism. For surjectivity, let ϕ P
Aut pGN q be an automorphism, and let ϕ# P Aut X N be the associated graph automorphism from
Theorem 5.19. By [MS25, Theorem 5.11], the map GN Ñ Aut pXN q induced by the action is an
isomorphism. In particular there exists g P GN such that ϕ# coincides with the action of g on X N .
                                     p0q
This implies that, for every v P X         ,
                                                ϕpM ZvN q “ M ZgpvN q .
30                                      G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


Arguing as in [Iva97, Section 3], we will now show that ϕ coincides with the conjugation by g. Indeed,
for every f P G,
                             ϕpM f ZvN f ´1 q “ ϕpM Zf pvN q q “ M Zgf pvN q ,
where we used that f ZvN f ´1 “ Zf pvN q by how half Dehn twists behave under conjugation. However
                        ϕpM f ZvN f ´1 q “ ϕpf qϕpM ZvN qϕpf q´1 “ M Zϕpf qgpvN q .
Since the cyclic directions of two distinct vertices of X N intersect trivially, the above computation
                                                p0q
shows that gf pvN q “ ϕpf qgpvN q for all v P X , or in other words ϕpf q “ gf g ´1 as automorphisms
of X N . Then again [MS25, Theorem 5.11] shows that ϕpf q must coincide with gf g ´1 for all f P GN ,
thus proving that ϕ is the conjugation by g.
   We are left to prove injectivity of the map GN Ñ Aut pGN q, or equivalently that GN has no centre.
To see this, notice that, if g P GN and the image of any half Dehn twist commute, then the above
arguments show that g acts trivially on X N , and again [MS25, Theorem 5.11] implies that g must be
trivial.                                                                                             □
Remark 5.23. We can rephrase the above Theorem by saying that the outer automorphism group
of GN is trivial. However, the fact that OutpGN q is finite could already be extracted from results in
the literature. Indeed, by [DHS21, Theorem 5.8.(2)], GN is non-elementary hyperbolic, so classical
work of Paulin and Bestvina-Feighn, among others [Pau91, BF95], proves that GN has finite outer
automorphism group unless it admits a splitting over virtually cyclic subgroups. The latter does not
happen because mapping class groups have Serre’s property (FA) by [CV96], and this property passes
to quotients.

                            6. Distinguishing braid group and spheres
   We conclude the paper by proving that the four strand braid group (resp. the mapping class group
of a sphere with five punctures) can be recognised from the braid groups on more strands (resp. the
mapping class groups of spheres with more punctures) by its non-elementary hyperbolic quotients.
This will prove the two parts of Theorem B.
   We first set up some notation and recall some well-known facts, referring to [FM12] for all the
details.
   The groups. For n ě 4, let Sn be a sphere with k punctures, let MCGpSn q be its usual mapping
class group (so we do not allow orientation-reversing homeomorphisms), and let MCGpSn , ˚q be the
finite-index subgroup of MCGpSn q fixing a given puncture. Also, let Bn be the braid group on n
strands, which is the mapping class group of a n-punctured disk Dn . The two mapping class groups
are related via the capping homomorphism, giving a short exact sequence
(4)                               0 Ñ xT y Ñ Bn Ñ MCGpSn`1 , ˚q Ñ 0
where T is the Dehn twist around the boundary of Dn ; in turn, forgetting the puncture gives a
surjection MCGpSn`1 , ˚q Ñ MCGpSn q, called the forgetful map.
    Generators. Bn is generated by the half Dehn twists τ “ τ1 , . . . τn´1 “ τ 1 on the curves
γ1 , . . . , γn´1 from the left of Figure 5. Furthermore, a (slightly redundant) generating set for the
pure braid group P Bn , which is the finite-index subgroup of Bn fixing all punctures, is given by the
                                      ˘                                                        `        ´
Dehn twists around the curves tηi,j     u1ďiăjďn from the right of Figure 5 (notice that γi “ ηi,i`1 “ ηi,i`1
for all i “ 1, . . . , n ´ 1). Any two half Dehn twists are conjugate inside Bn .
    Abelian quotients. The abelianisation of Bn is infinite cyclic, generated by the image of τ , and T
maps to npn´1q inside the abelianisation. As a consequence, the abelianisations of both MCGpSn`1 , ˚q
and MCGpSn q are finite cyclic.
    Torsion. Finite-order elements in MCGpS5 q are topologically conjugate to rotations, fixing at most
two punctures and cyclically permuting the others, and therefore have order at most 5 (see e.g. [FM12,
Section 7.1.1]). Furthermore, the subgroup fixing a pair of disjoint curves is generated by the half Dehn
twists around those two curves.
    The following is the main technical statement of the section:
                                      CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                          31




        Figure 5. On the left, the half Dehn twists around the curves γi generate the braid
        group. On the right, the pure braid group is generated by the Dehn twists around
                    ˘                                                    `
        the curves ηi,j for 1 ď i ă j ď n (here we only drew some). ηi,j   passes above the
                                                      ´
        punctures between the ith and the jth, while ηi,j passes below them.

Theorem 6.1. Let n ě 6 (resp. n “ 5). Then there exists a non-elementary hyperbolic quotient Q of
MCGpS5 q (resp. MCGpS5 , ˚q) such that any homomorphism Bn Ñ Q has virtually cyclic image.
Before proving Theorem 6.1, we show that it implies both parts of Theorem B.
Corollary 6.2. For every n ě 5, there exists a non-elementary hyperbolic quotient Q1 of B4 such that
any homomorphism Bn Ñ Q1 has virtually cyclic image.
Proof. Let Q be the quotient of MCGpS5 q from Theorem 6.1 (resp. of MCGpS5 , ˚q if n “ 5), and let
Q1 be the image of MCGpS5 , ˚q inside Q (resp. let Q1 “ Q if n “ 5). Since Q1 has finite index in Q,
it is also non-elementary hyperbolic, and it is a quotient of MCGpS5 , ˚q, hence of B4 via the capping
homomorphism. Furthermore, every map Bn Ñ Q1 is in particular a map Bn Ñ Q, and must therefore
have virtually cyclic image.                                                                        □
Corollary 6.3. For every n ě 6, there exists a non-elementary hyperbolic quotient Q of MCGpS5 q
such that any homomorphism MCGpSn q Ñ Q has finite image.
Proof. Let Q be the quotient of MCGpS5 q such that any homomorphism Bn Ñ Q has virtually cyclic
image, and let ϕ : MCGpSn q Ñ Q be any homomorphism. Composing the capping homomorphism
Bn Ñ MCGpSn`1 , ˚q, the forgetful map MCGpSn`1 , ˚q Ñ MCGpSn q, and ϕ yields a homomorphism
Bn Ñ Q, so ϕ must have virtually cyclic image.
   By [Mac96, Lemma 3.2], an infinite virtually cyclic group surjects onto either Z or the infinite
dihedral group D8 – Z{2 ˚ Z{2, so it is enough to exclude that MCGpSn q surjects onto these. Towards
this, recall that the abelianisation of MCGpSn q is finite cyclic; therefore MCGpSn q does not surject
neither onto Z nor onto D8 (which maps onto the non-cyclic Abelian group Z{2 ˆ Z{2).                □
We will prove both statements of Theorem 6.1 at the same time, highlighting the adjustments needed
for the case n “ 5 in parentheses. For the sake of light notation, let H “ Bn , let G “ MCGpS5 q (resp.
MCGpS5 , ˚q if n “ 5), and let X be the curve graph of S5 . The arguments from [Man24, Section 2.3.1]
show that G admits a colourable short HHG structure, with support graph X and cyclic directions
generated by half Dehn twists. Fix a positive integer M , and let
(5)                             N 1 “ M ppn ´ 1q2 q! and N “ N 1 p5nq!
We require that M is deep enough that the quotients GN , GN 1 , and GM all satisfy the properties from
Section 5.2.
  We will argue that Q “ GN , which is non-elementary hyperbolic by Lemma 5.8, is the desired
quotient. Consider a homomorphism ϕ : H Ñ GN . We shall consider various cases depending on the
image of τ , each case corresponding to one of the lemmas below.
32                                         G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


Lemma 6.4. If ϕpτ q has infinite order then ϕpHq is virtually cyclic.
Proof. Let E ď GN be the maximal virtually cyclic subgroup containing ϕpτ q, which exists by e.g.
[DGO17, Lemma 6.5]. E contains the centraliser of ϕpτ q by [DGO17, Corollary 6.6]; therefore ϕpτi q P E
for all i “ 3, . . . , n´1, since γ1 and γi are disjoint for i in this range. Notice also that ϕpτ 1 q is conjugated
to ϕpτ q, so it must have infinite order as well; in particular, E is also the maximal virtually cyclic
subgroup containing ϕpτ 1 q, and therefore its centraliser. Finally, since there are at least 5 punctures,
τ 1 “ τn´1 and τ2 commute, and the same argument shows that ϕpτ2 q P E. We thus proved that ϕ maps
the generating set tτ1 , . . . , τn´1 u inside the virtually cyclic group E, and therefore ϕpHq is virtually
cyclic.                                                                                                            □

Remark 6.5. In the argument above we only used that GN is hyperbolic, so in fact any homomorphism
from H to a hyperbolic group has virtually cyclic image provided that τ has infinite order.
From now on, we assume that ϕpτ q has finite order. Towards applying Corollary 5.11, we look at the
fixed point set of ϕpτ q inside X N .
Lemma 6.6. If ϕpτ q does not fix any simplex of X N setwise, then ϕpHq is finite.
Proof. For every 1 ď i ă j ď n ´ 1 such that j ´ 1 ą 1, let Fij – xϕpτi q, ϕpτj qy, which is a finite
Abelian subgroup of GN . Since ϕpτ q, hence any of its conjugate, does not preserve any simplex of X N ,
Corollary 5.11 yields that each Fij is the isomorphic image under ϕN of a finite subgroup Fij1 ď G,
which must therefore be Abelian. By [Stu04, Theorem 3], each Fij1 is isomorphic to a subgroup of
either Z{4 or one of the Dihedral groups D3 – Z{3 ¸ Z{2 and D5 – Z{5 ¸ Z{2. Notice that Abelian
subgroups of these three finite groups are cyclic, so Fij “ xϕpτi qy “ xϕpτj qy (here we are using that
ϕpτi q and ϕpτj q have the same order as they are conjugate). Hence ϕpHq “ xFij y1ďiăjďn´1 “ xϕpτ qy
is finite, as required.                                                                              □

In view of Lemma 6.6, we henceforth assume that ϕpτ q is an element of the setwise stabiliser of a
simplex of X setwise. We now describe such an element:
Lemma 6.7. Let g P GN be a finite order element.
  (1) If g fixes an edge tvN , wN u of X N setwise, then g 2 P xZvN , ZwN y.
  (2) If g fixes a vertex vN of X N , but does not preserve any edge setwise, then g q P ZvN for some
      2 ď q ď 3; furthermore, g fixes no vertex of X N other than vN .
Proof. (1) As a consequence of [MS26, Corollary 3.18], the setwise stabiliser of tvN , wN u is the πN -
image of the setwise stabiliser in G of any edge tv, wu Ă X lifting tvN , wN u. This is generated by the
half Dehn twists around v and w and by any involution swapping v and w, so g 2 is the image of a
multitwist.
                   p0q
   (2) Let v P X       be a representative for vN . Since g does not fix any wN P LinkX N pvN q, Corol-
lary 5.14 yields that the image of g inside HvN comes from a finite-order element r of Hv . By inspection
of [FM12, Section 7.1.1], r is either a rotation of angle π fixing two punctures, or a rotation of angle
2π{3 fixing one puncture. In turn, depending on the rotation angle, r admits a lift R P StabG pvq
which is a square root of the Dehn twist T around v, or a cubic root of T or T 2 , respectively. Thus
g “ πN phs Rq, where h is the half Dehn twist around v, whose square is T , and s P Z. This immediately
shows that g q P ZvN , where 2 ď q ď 3 is the order of r. For later purposes we also notice that, since
g “ πN phs Rq and R is a root of a small power of T , some power of g 2 acts on Cp∆vN q with minimum
displacement greater than the constant E   r from Lemma 5.16.
   We now prove that vN is the only fixed point of g in X N . Indeed, by assumption g does not fix any
wN P LinkX N pvN q. Moreover, if g fixes some uN R Star pvN q, then gZuN g ´1 “ ZgpuN q “ ZuN ; hence
the square power of g commutes with ZuN , contradicting Lemma 5.16.                                     □

We momentarily leave the case where ϕpτ q lies in a cyclic direction for later, and deal with the others
in Lemma 6.8 and Lemma 6.9 below.
                                          CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                              33


Lemma 6.8. Suppose that ϕpτ q fixes an edge tvN , wN u of X N setwise, but does not belong to either
ZvN or ZwN . Then ϕpHq is finite.
Proof. By inspection of Lemma 6.7.(1), the square ϕpτ q2 belongs to xZvN , ZwN y. If ϕpτ 2 q is trivial
then all its conjugates are also trivial. In this case ϕ vanishes on the pure braid group, which has finite
index in H, and therefore ϕpHq is finite.
    Suppose now that ϕpτ 2 q “ zvrN zws
                                        N
                                           is non-trivial, and notice that both r and s must be non-zero
since we are assuming that ϕpτ q R ZvN Y ZwN . Let σ be the half Dehn twist around any of the curves
 ˘
ηi,j from Figure 5 for 3 ď i ă j ď n; the choice of i and j in this range ensures that σ and τ commute.
Since τ and σ are conjugate in H, there exists g P GN such that
                                    ϕpσq2 “ gϕpτ q2 g ´1 “ zgpv
                                                            r
                                                                   zs
                                                                N q gpwN q
                                                                           .
By Corollary 5.17.(2), g must permute tvN , wN u, so ϕpσq2 P xZvN , ZwN y. Now let σ 1 be the half Dehn
twist around any of the curves ηi˘1 ,j 1 from Figure 5, for 1 ď i1 ď 2 and i1 ă j 1 ď n. Since n ě 5,
σ 1 commutes with some curve σ as above, so the same argument yields that ϕpσ 1 q2 P xZvN , ZwN y.
Summarising, we proved that ϕ maps the Dehn twists on the curves from Figure 5, which generate the
pure braid group, inside the finite subgroup xZvN , ZwN y, and again this implies that ϕpHq is finite. □
Lemma 6.9. Suppose that ϕpτ q fixes a vertex vN of X N , but does not preserve any edge setwise. Then
ϕpHq is finite.
Proof. The proof in this setting is a mixture of the arguments from Lemma 6.6 and Lemma 6.8, as we
now explain.
    Firstly, Lemma 6.7.(2) gives that vN is the only vertex of X N fixed by ϕpτ q. Now, for all i “
3, . . . , n ´ 1, ϕpτi q is a conjugate of ϕpτ q, so it must fix a single vertex of X N as well. Moreover, since
it commutes with ϕpτ q, it acts on its fixed set in X N , and therefore the unique fixed point of ϕpτi q is
vN . Hence we can look at the images of ϕpτ q and ϕpτi q inside the hyperbolic group HvN , call them y
and yi , which are conjugate and commute.
    We now argue as in Lemma 6.6. The subgroup xy, yi y does not fix any vertex wN P LinkX N pvN q,
so by Corollary 5.14 it must be the projection of a finite Abelian subgroup F ď Hv . In turn, every
finite-order element in Hv permutes at least two punctures, so F injects inside the symmetric group
S3 , and all Abelian subgroups of the latter are cyclic. This shows that yi P xyy, and therefore ϕpτi q
belongs to the finite group generated by zv and any preimage x of y in StabGN pvN q. We can now
apply the same argument to the commuting pair ϕpτ2 q and ϕpτn´1 q to get that ϕpHq “ xϕpτi qy1ďiďn´1
is contained inside xzv , xy, and the latter is finite as it is a finite cyclic extension of a finite cyclic
group.                                                                                                        □
The following Lemma is the last case of Theorem 6.1.
Lemma 6.10. Suppose that ϕpτ q P ZvN , for some vertex vN of X N . Then ϕpHq is virtually cyclic.
Proof. This is the most involved case. Firstly, we consider what happens if ϕpT q has large order.
Claim 6.11. If ϕpT q has order greater than 5, then ϕpHq is virtually cyclic.
Proof of Claim 6.11. If ϕpT q has infinite order, then ϕpHq lies in the centraliser of ϕpT q, which is
virtually cyclic as GN is hyperbolic.
   Now assume the order of ϕpT q is finite and greater than 5. Again, torsion elements in MCGpS5 q
have order at most 5, so Corollary 5.11 implies that ϕpT q fixes a simplex of X setwise. In turn, by
Lemma 6.7, we find some 1 ď k ď 3 such that ϕpT k q is the image of either a multitwist or a power of
a half Dehn twist. In the former situation, ϕpHq, which centralises ϕpT k q, must lie in the centraliser
of the image of a multitwist, which is finite by Corollary 5.18.
                                                             p0q
   Suppose instead that ϕpT k q P ZwN for some wN P X N , so that ϕpHq ď StabGN pwN q. Since
                     k
ϕpτ q P ZvN and ϕpT q P ZwN commute, the arguments from Claim 5.21 show that wN P Star pvN q.
Now recall that, for every i “ 1, . . . , n ´ 1, ϕpτi q is conjugated to ϕpτ q by an element gi inside
ϕpHq ď StabGN pwN q, so that ϕpτi q P Zgi vN .
34                                     G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


   If vN “ wN , then gi vN “ wN for all i, because each gi fixes wN . This implies that ϕpHq ď ZwN ,
which is finite. Suppose instead that vN ‰ wN , so that gi vN P LinkX N pwN q for all i, and we shall
derive a contradiction. Notice that at least two gi vN must be distinct, as otherwise ϕpHq ď ZvN
while ϕpT k q P ZwN . This also implies that there exist i, j with |i ´ j| ą 1 and gi vN ‰ gj vN , for
otherwise, using that there are at least 5 indices, we readily see that all gi vN would coincide. Since
|i ´ j| ą 1, ϕpτi q and ϕpτj q commute, so gi vN and gj vN , which do not coincide, must be X N -adjacent
by Corollary 5.17.(1). However this would violate the fact that X N has no triangles, as gi vN and gj vN
belong to LinkX N pwN q.                                                                               ■

     In view of Claim 6.11, we now assume that ϕ vanishes on T c for some c ď 5. Now recall that we
                                                                                      ϕ       π1
set N 1 “ N {p5nq! in Equation (5). The next Claim shows that the composition H Ý
                                                                                Ñ GN ÝÑ GN 1 has
finite image, where π 1 : GN Ñ GN 1 is the natural projection:

Claim 6.12. Let K ď GN be the subgroup generated by the image of all N 1 -th powers of half Dehn
Twists. Then ϕpHq X K has index at most pn ´ 1q2 in ϕpHq.

Proof of Claim 6.12. Let x P H be an n-th root of T which cyclically permutes all punctures. By
[CKM19, Lemma 6.2], for every 1 ď i ď n ´ 1 the subgroup normally generated by xk contains the
commutator subgroup; furthermore, since x is an nth root of T , it maps to n´1 inside the abelianisation
of H, so the index of xxxk yy inside H is at most pn ´ 1q2 .
    Now let t “ ϕpxq, which has order at most 5n by Claim 6.11. If tk is trivial for some 1 ď i ď n ´ 1
then ϕ vanishes on the finite-index subgroup xxtk yy, and therefore ϕpHq is finite. Otherwise, suppose
that the order of t is at least n, and in particular t is not the image of any finite-order element of G
(if n “ 5 we use that a finite-order element of MCGpS5 , ˚q has order at most 4). Hence t preserves a
simplex of X N by Corollary 5.11, and by Lemma 6.7 there exist 1 ď q ď 3 and an edge tuN , wN u of
X N such that tq P xZuN , ZwN y.
    Since t has order at most 5n, while ZuN – ZwN – Z{N Z by Lemma 5.15, we must have that
tq P xN 1 ZuN , N 1 ZwN y. This shows that K contains the normal closure xxtq yy, and since q ď 3 ă n ´ 1
the latter has index at most pn ´ 1q2 inside ϕpHq.                                                     ■

   Now, recall that we are working under the assumption that ϕpτ q P ZvN , and we want to show that
                                                    2
ϕpHq is virtually cyclic. By Claim 6.12, ϕpτ qppn´1q q! P K X ZvN , and the latter coincides with N 1 ZvN
by Lemma 5.15. Hence ϕpτ q P M ZvN , where M was defined as N 1 {ppn ´ 1q2 q! in Equation (5). Since
all generators of H are conjugate, we therefore get that ϕpHq ď xM ZvN yv PX p0q .
                                                                            N    N
   From here, we will show that indeed ϕpHq P M ZvN , concluding the proof. Towards this, the
arguments from [MS26, Section 3] describe xM ZvN yv PX p0q as the subgroup generated by a composite
                                                       N   N
rotating family, a notion introduced by Dahmani in [Dah18]. We do not need the full power of this
machinery: for our purposes, it is enough to know that, for every countable ordinal α, there exists a
subgroup Nα ď GN with the following properties:
       ‚ If α “ 0 then Nα “ M ZvN .
       ‚ If α “ β ` 1 for some ordinal β, then
                                           Ť Nα splits as a graph of groups over Nβ ;
       ‚ If α is a limit ordinal, then Nα “ βăα Nβ .
         Ť
       ‚ α Nα “ xM ZvN yv PX p0q .
                            N   N

Let α be the first Ť ordinal such that ϕpHq ď Nα . Notice that α is not a limit ordinal: indeed, if
ϕpHq ď Nα “ βăα Nβ , then each ϕpτi q belongs to Nβi for some βi ă α, and therefore ϕpHq ď
Nmaxi“1,...,n´2 βi ň Nα , against the definition of α.
   Notice also that α cannot be a successor ordinal either. Indeed, if there is β such that α “ β `1, then
ϕpHq is contained inside Nβ`1 but not Nβ , and therefore splits as a graph of groups over ϕpHq X Nβ .
However, ϕpHq is a quotient of H with finite abelianisation, since we are assuming that ϕ vanishes on
a power of T ; hence ϕpHq has Serre’s property (FA), which forbids any non-trivial splitting (see e.g.
[CV96, page 6] and the arguments therein).
                                            CUSPED SPACES FOR HHG                                                  35


   We must therefore have that α “ 0, so that ϕpHq ď M ZvN , as promised. This concludes the proof
of Lemma 6.10, and in turn that of Theorem 6.1.                                                 □

                                                   References
[ABM` 25]Carolyn Abbott, Daniel Berlyne, Giorgio Mangioni, Thomas Ng, and Alexander J. Rasmussen. Random
         quotients preserve acylindrical and hierarchical hyperbolicity, 2025.
[AGM09] Ian Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Fox Manning. Residual finiteness, QCERF and fillings of hyperbolic
         groups. Geom. Topol., 13(2):1043–1073, 2009.
[Ago13]  Ian Agol. The virtual Haken conjecture. Doc. Math., 18:1045–1087, 2013. With an appendix by Agol, Daniel
         Groves, and Jason Manning.
[Bar17]  A. Bartels. Coarse flow spaces for relatively hyperbolic groups. Compos. Math., 153(4):745–779, 2017.
[BB19]   Arthur Bartels and Mladen Bestvina. The Farrell-Jones conjecture for mapping class groups. Invent. Math.,
         215(2):651–712, 2019.
[BF95]   Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Stable actions of groups on real trees. Invent. Math., 121(2):287–321,
         1995.
[BH99]   Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren
         der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag,
         Berlin, 1999.
[BHMS24] Jason Behrstock, Mark Hagen, Alexandre Martin, and Alessandro Sisto. A combinatorial take on hierarchical
         hyperbolicity and applications to quotients of mapping class groups. J. Topol., 17(3):94, 2024. Id/No e12351.
[BHS17a] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Asymptotic dimension and small-cancellation for
         hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3), 114(5):890–926, 2017.
[BHS17b] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, I: Curve complexes
         for cubical groups. Geom. Topol., 21(3):1731–1804, 2017.
[BHS19]  Jason Behrstock, Mark Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces II: Combination the-
         orems and the distance formula. Pacific J. Math., 299(2):257–338, 2019.
[BHS21]  Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Quasiflats in hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Duke
         Math. J., 170(5):909–996, 2021.
[Bow12]  B. H. Bowditch. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 22(3):1250016, 66, 2012.
[CKM19] Lei Chen, Kevin Kordek, and Dan Margalit. Homomorphisms between braid groups. Preprint,
         arXiv:1910.00712 [math.GT] (2019), 2019.
[CL24]   Lei Chen and Justin Lanier. Constraining mapping class group homomorphisms using finite subgroups.
         Geom. Dedicata, 218(5):Paper No. 100, 17, 2024.
[CV96]   Marc Culler and Karen Vogtmann. A group-theoretic criterion for property FA. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.,
         124(3):677–683, 1996.
[Dah18]  François Dahmani. The normal closure of big Dehn twists and plate spinning with rotating families. Geom.
         Topol., 22(7):4113–4144, 2018.
[DG18]   François Dahmani and Vincent Guirardel. Recognizing a relatively hyperbolic group by its Dehn fillings.
         Duke Math. J., 167(12):2189–2241, 2018.
[DGO17] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, and D. Osin. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and rotating families in groups
         acting on hyperbolic spaces. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 245(1156):v+152, 2017.
[DHS17]  Matthew Gentry Durham, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Boundaries and automorphisms of hierar-
         chically hyperbolic spaces. Geom. Topol., 21(6):3659–3758, 2017.
[DHS21]  François Dahmani, Mark Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Dehn filling Dehn twists. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh
         Sect. A, 151(1):28–51, 2021.
[DMS25] Matthew Gentry Durham, Yair Minsky, and Alessandro Sisto. Asymptotically CAT(0) metrics, Z-structures,
         and the Farrell-Jones Conjecture, 2025.
[DT19]   Fran¸cois Dahmani and Nicholas Touikan. Deciding isomorphy using Dehn fillings, the splitting case. Invent.
         Math., 215(1):81–169, 2019.
[Dur16]  Matthew Gentry Durham. The augmented marking complex of a surface. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 94(3):933–
         969, 2016.
[Dur23]  Matthew Gentry Durham. Cubulating Infinity in Hierarchically Hyperbolic Spaces. Preprint,
         arXiv:2308.13689 [math.GR], 2023.
[FM12]   Benson Farb and Dan Margalit. A primer on mapping class groups, volume 49 of Princeton Mathematical
         Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2012.
[GM08]   Daniel Groves and Jason Fox Manning. Dehn filling in relatively hyperbolic groups. Israel Journal of Math-
         ematics, 168(1):317–429, Nov 2008.
[GM18]   Daniel Groves and Jason Fox Manning. Dehn fillings and elementary splittings. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
         370(5):3017–3051, 2018.
[GM21]   Daniel Groves and Jason Fox Manning. Quasiconvexity and Dehn filling. Amer. J. Math., 143(1):95–124,
         2021.
36                                         G. MANGIONI AND A. SISTO


[GMS19]   Daniel Groves, Jason Fox Manning, and Alessandro Sisto. Boundaries of Dehn fillings. Geom. Topol.,
          23(6):2929–3002, 2019.
[HHP23]   Thomas Haettel, Nima Hoda, and Harry Petyt. Coarse injectivity, hierarchical hyperbolicity and semihyper-
          bolicity. Geom. Topol., 27(4):1587–1633, 2023.
[HK05]    William J. Harvey and Mustafa Korkmaz. Homomorphisms from mapping class groups. Bull. London Math.
          Soc., 37(2):275–284, 2005.
[HMS26]   Mark Hagen, Giorgio Mangioni, and Alessandro Sisto. A combinatorial structure for many hierarchically
          hyperbolic spaces. Pacific J. Math., 341(2):305–377, 2026.
[HP22]    Mark F. Hagen and Harry Petyt. Projection complexes and quasimedian maps. Algebr. Geom. Topol.,
          22(7):3277–3304, 2022.
[HPZ]     Mark Hagen, Harry Petyt, and Abdul Zalloum. Walls and metric reconstruction. In preparation.
[Hru10]   G. Christopher Hruska. Relative hyperbolicity and relative quasiconvexity for countable groups. Algebr.
          Geom. Topol., 10(3):1807–1856, 2010.
[Iva97]   Nikolai V. Ivanov. Automorphisms of complexes of curves and of Teichmüller spaces. In Progress in knot
          theory and related topics, volume 56 of Travaux en Cours, pages 113–120. Hermann, Paris, 1997.
[Lan13]   Urs Lang. Injective hulls of certain discrete metric spaces and groups. J. Topol. Anal., 5(3):297–331, 2013.
[Mac96]   Dugald Macpherson. Permutation groups whose subgroups have just finitely many orbits. In Ordered groups
          and infinite permutation groups, volume 354 of Math. Appl., pages 221–229. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht,
          1996.
[Man24]   Giorgio Mangioni. Short hierarchically hyperbolic groups I: uncountably many coarse median structures.
          arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09232, 2024.
[Min96]   Yair N. Minsky. Extremal length estimates and product regions in Teichmüller space. Duke Math. J.,
          83(2):249–286, 1996.
[MM00]    H. A. Masur and Y. N. Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves. II. Hierarchical structure. Geom. Funct.
          Anal., 10(4):902–974, 2000.
[MS25]    Giorgio Mangioni and Alessandro Sisto. Rigidity of mapping class groups mod powers of twists. Proceedings
          of the Royal Society of Edinburgh: Section A Mathematics, pages 1–71, 2025.
[MS26]    G. Mangioni and A. Sisto. Short hierarchically hyperbolic groups II: Quotients and the Hopf property for
          Artin groups. Advances in Mathematics, 486:110736, 2026.
[Osi07]   Denis V. Osin. Peripheral fillings of relatively hyperbolic groups. Invent. Math., 167(2):295–326, 2007.
[Pau91]   Frédéric Paulin. Outer automorphisms of hyperbolic groups and small actions on R-trees. In Arboreal group
          theory (Berkeley, CA, 1988), volume 19 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 331–343. Springer, New York,
          1991.
[Rus20]   Jacob Russell. From hierarchical to relative hyperbolicity. International Mathematics Research Notices, 2020.
[Sis13]   Alessandro Sisto. Projections and relative hyperbolicity. Enseign. Math. (2), 59(1-2):165–181, 2013.
[Stu04]   Michal Stukow. Conjugacy classes of finite subgroups of certain mapping class groups. Turkish J. Math.,
          28(2):101–110, 2004.
[Wan21]   Oliver H. Wang. A spectral sequence for Dehn fillings. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 21(5):2257–2272, 2021.

   (Giorgio Mangioni) Maxwell Institute and Department of Mathematics, Heriot-Watt University, Edin-
burgh, UK
   Email address: gm2070@hw.ac.uk

   (Alessandro Sisto) Maxwell Institute and Department of Mathematics, Heriot-Watt University, Edin-
burgh, UK
   Email address: a.sisto@hw.ac.uk
