                                                    HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS I:
                                                        EQUATIONALLY NOETHERIAN GROUPS AND FAMILIES

                                                                                          D. GROVES AND M. HULL
arXiv:1704.03491v1 [math.GR] 11 Apr 2017




                                                    Abstract. We study the set of homomorphisms from a fixed finitely generated group G into a family
                                                    of groups G which are ‘uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic’. Our main results reduce this study to sets of
                                                    homomorphisms which do not diverge in an appropriate sense. As an application, we prove that any relatively
                                                    hyperbolic group with equationally noetherian peripheral subgroups is itself equationally noetherian.




                                                                                                  Contents

                                              1. Introduction                                                                                                      1
                                              2. Preliminaries                                                                                                     5
                                              3. Equationally noetherian families and limit groups                                                                 7
                                              4. Limit actions and the Rips machine                                                                               12
                                              5. JSJ decompositions and the Shortening Argument                                                                   20
                                              6. Shortening quotients and reduction to non-divergent limit groups                                                 29
                                              7. Relatively hyperbolic groups                                                                                     34
                                              References                                                                                                          38



                                                                                              1. Introduction

                                              In this paper, we are interested in the following problem. Suppose that G is a family of groups, and G
                                           is a finitely generated group. What is the structure of the set Hom(G, G) of all homomorphisms from G to
                                           elements of G? We are concerned with the situation where G consists of a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic
                                           family of groups (see Definition 2.8 below). A specific example is where G = {Γ} is a single acylindrically
                                           hyperbolic group, though there are many other interesting cases, as we explain below. The study in this
                                           paper builds on many previous authors’ work, for example [1, 12, 13, 22, 23, 24, 31, 36, 38]. With the
                                           exception of [22], all of these previous works consider a fixed group to be the target, rather than a family of
                                           groups.
                                              Acylindrically hyperbolic groups (defined by Osin in [28], see Definition 2.5 below) are a large class of
                                           groups that have recently been the study of intense activity in geometric group theory. On the one hand,
                                           the definition is powerful enough that there is a rich theory of these groups, while on the other hand it is
                                           flexible enough that there any many examples of acylindrically hyperbolic groups. Examples include (see
                                           [28, Section 8] for more discussion):
                                               (1) Any non-elementary hyperbolic group;
                                               (2) Any non-elementary relatively hyperbolic group;

                                              The first author was partially supported by a grant from the Simons Foundation (#342049 to Daniel Groves) and by NSF
                                           grant DMS-1507076.
                                                                                                        1
2                                             D. GROVES AND M. HULL


    (3) The mapping class group of almost any surface of finite type;
    (4) The outer automorphism of a finitely generated free group of rank at least 2;
    (5) Directly indecomposable right-angled Artin groups, and more generally any CAT(0) group which
        contains a rank 1 isometry;
    (6) Any group admitting a non-elementary action on a simplicial tree which is k–acylindrical for some k.
        More generally, a group admitting a non-elementary (k, C)–acylindrical action on a simplicial tree
        for some k and C. In particular, this includes the fundamental group of any irreducible, compact
        3–manifold with a non-trivial JSJ-decomposition.

   In this paper, we are concerned with families of acylindrically hyperbolic groups which are ‘uniform’ in the
sense given in Definition 2.8 below. The first example of such a ‘family’ is a single acylindrically hyperbolic
group, and this is an important case. Perhaps the most natural example of a uniform family is the set of
groups acting k–acylindrically on simplicial trees for some fixed k. A particularly important class is the set
of fundamental groups of compact 3–manifolds, since a closed, orientable, irreducible 3–manifold is either
finitely covered by a torus bundle over the circle or else the JSJ decomposition is 4–acylindrical by [43,
Lemma 2.4]. We expect the results in this paper to have many applications to the study of Hom(G, M3 )
where G is an arbitrary finitely generated group and M3 is the set of fundamental groups of (compact)
3–manifolds.
   One motivation for studying sets of homomorphisms is topological, since homotopy classes of maps between
aspherical spaces are in bijective correspondence with homomorphisms between their fundamental groups.
3–manifold groups are of particular interest here, since many 3–manifolds are aspherical. We expect that
studying sets of homomorphisms to either a fixed 3–manifold group or to the family of all 3–manifold groups
can be used to better understand (homotopy classes of) maps between 3–manifolds.
   Another motivation which is more closely related to logic comes from the study of equations in groups
or algebraic geometry over groups [2]. Understanding sets of solutions to systems of equations in a group
Γ is the first step towards understanding the elementary theory of Γ, and these sets of solutions naturally
correspond with sets of homomorphisms to Γ. We explain this connection below in the more general context
of a family of groups.
   Let G be a family of groups and let Fn be the free group of rank n. An equation is an element W ∈ Fn
which we identify with a freely reduced word in the generators x±1              ±1                                  n
                                                                     1 , ..., xn . For Γ ∈ G and (g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ Γ ,
                                                                                                 −1         −1
let W (g1 , ..., gn ) denote the element of Γ obtained by replacing each xi with gi and each xi with gi in the
word W . (g1 , ..., gn ) is called a solution to the equation W if W (g1 , ..., gn ) = 1. For a system of equations
S ⊆ Fn , we define


                      VG (S) = {(g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ Γn | Γ ∈ G and W (g1 , ..., gn ) = 1 ∀W ∈ S}.

   That is, VG (S) is the algebraic set of solutions to the system of equations S. Observe that (g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ Γn
belongs to S if and only if the map which sends each xi to gi extends to a homomorphism Fn /hhSii → Γ.
Hence, there is a natural bijective correspondence between VG (S) and Hom(Fn /hhSii, G).
   The most important property about a family G of groups for the purposes of this paper is that of the
family G being equationally noetherian, which can be thought of as a group-theoretic version of the conclusion
of the Hilbert Basis Theorem.

Definition A. We say that a family G is an equationally noetherian family of groups if for any n and any
S ⊆ Fn , there exists a finite S0 ⊆ S such that VG (S0 ) = VG (S).

   This definition generalizes the well-studied notion of what it means for a group to be equationally noe-
therian (the case where G consists of a single group). This definition can also be translated to a statement
in terms of sets of homomorphisms as follows. The family G is equationally noetherian if and only if for any
finitely generated group G, there is a finitely presented group P and an epimorphism P ։ G which induces
                        HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                   3


a bijection between Hom(G, G) and Hom(P, G). Another characterization of the equationally noetherian
property in terms of sequences of homomorphisms is given by Theorem 3.7.
   The equationally noetherian property has been very important in the study of equations over groups, model
theory of groups, and many other questions: see, for example, [2, 12, 14, 22, 23, 29, 36, 37, 38]. Similarly,
the question of whether a family of groups G is equationally noetherian is of fundamental importance for
the study of the set Hom(G, G). In particular, this property is more or less essential in order to have a
meaningful description of sets of the homomorphisms to a group or family of groups.
   We note that to say that a family G is equationally noetherian is much stronger than to say that each
element of G is equationally noetherian. The following collections all have the property that they are not
equationally noetherian as a family while each individual member is equationally noetherian: (i) Finite
groups; (ii) hyperbolic groups; and (iii) linear groups (see Example 3.14). There are many other such
examples.
   One important consequence of a family G being equationally noetherian is that any sequence of surjective
maps
                                       Γ1 ։ Γ2 ։ . . . ։ Γn ։ . . .
where each Γi ∈ G eventually consists of isomorphisms (see Theorem 3.12). This can be thought of as an
extension of the Hopfian property to families of groups; In particular, it implies that each element of G is
Hopfian (see Corollary 3.13).
    Let G be a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic collection of groups (see Definition 2.8). Since the subgroups
of G which act with bounded orbits on the associated δ–hyperbolic spaces could be completely arbitrary, it
is impossible to say anything about Hom(G, G) in general since this is as hard as understanding the set of
homomorphisms from G to all groups. Therefore, we first restrict attention to the case that a sequence of
homomorphisms behaves in an interesting way with respect to the δ–hyperbolic space. The right notion is
for a sequence to diverge, as defined in Definition 4.2. The following is our main technical result; in light
of Theorem 3.7, it says that if G fails to be equationally noetherian then that failure is witnessed by some
non-divergent sequence of homomorphisms. In the following, ω is a non-principal ultrafilter which is fixed
once and for all throughout this paper (see Section 3).
Theorem B. Suppose that G is uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family. Furthermore, suppose that when-
ever G is a finitely generated group and ηi : G → G is a non-divergent sequence of homomorphisms, ηi
ω–almost surely factors through the limit map η∞ . Then G is equationally noetherian.

   This result allows a reduction of the study of the set of Hom(G, G) to the study of non-divergent sequences
of homomorphisms. With extra assumptions, it is possible to say more.
   Answering a question from [8], in [38, Theorem 9.1] Sela proved that if A and B are equationally noetherian
then their free product A ∗ B is also equationally noetherian. In Corollary C we provide a generalization of
this: if G is an equationally noetherian family of groups then the set of all free products of elements of G,
denoted by G ∗ , is itself an equationally noetherian family.
Corollary C. If G is an equationally noetherian family of groups, then G ∗ is an equationally noetherian
family of groups.

   We remark that in [22], Jaligot and Sela undertake much of the same work that we do in the case of free
products. They suggested that their work should be able to be generalized, in particular to k–acylindrical
actions on trees. We believe that Theorem B is the appropriate generalizing of (the beginning of) [22]. In
order to make further progress in this direction, one needs more control over the elliptic elements. The
reason for this is that when considering free products, it is clear that a non-divergent sequence has a limiting
simplicial action on a tree with trivial stabilizers. Even in the case of k–acylindrical actions on trees, the
limiting action is k–acylindrical and simplicial in the non-divergent case, but it need not be any nicer than
that. For example, it seems very hard to retain finite generation of edge stabilizers under non-divergent
limits.
4                                           D. GROVES AND M. HULL


   In [38], Sela proved that torsion-free hyperbolic groups are equationally noetherian. In [12, Theorem
5.16], the first author proved that a torsion-free group which is hyperbolic relative to abelian subgroups is
equationally noetherian. Subgroups of equationally noetherian groups are equationally noetherian, so the
strongest possible result in this direction about relatively hyperbolic groups would be that if the peripheral
subgroups of a relatively hyperbolic group are equationally noetherian then the whole group is. Using
Theorem B, we prove that this is indeed the case.

Theorem D. If Γ is hyperbolic relative to equationally noetherian subgroups, then Γ is equationally noe-
therian.

   Note that Theorem D uses the machinery developed in this paper for families of acylindrically hyperbolic
groups to prove a theorem about a single relatively hyperbolic group which is much more general than
previous results in this direction.
  Since groups acting geometrically on a CAT(0) space with isolated flats are hyperbolic relative to virtually
abelian subgroups [20], this theorem answers [34, Question I.(8).(i)] and [34, Question I.8.(ii)]. In the case
where Γ is torsion-free and the peripheral subgroups are abelian, these questions were answered by the first
author in [12].
   The following immediate consequence of Theorem D has nothing a priori to do with equationally noe-
therian groups.

Corollary E. Suppose that Γ is hyperbolic relative to linear groups. Then Γ is Hopfian.

   As stated above, we expect that the results in this paper will have many further applications, in particular
to the study of groups acting k–acylindrically on simplicial trees. In a sequel to this paper, we show that when
G is both uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic and equationally noetherian, then there is a Makanin–Razborov
diagram which parameterizes Hom(G, G) modulo homomorphisms which factor through non-divergent G–
limit groups.
   We now provide a brief outline of the contents of this paper. In Section 2 we provide some preliminary
definitions and results about (families of) acylindrically hyperbolic groups. In Section 3 we introduce the
notion of an equationally noetherian family of groups, relate this to the well-studied notion of equationally
noetherian groups and also to different kinds of limit groups. In Section 4 we explain how a divergent
sequence of homomorphisms leads to a limiting action on an R–tree. We also explain that the Rips machine
applies to such actions and thus yields a graph of groups decomposition. In Section 5 we prove the existence
of a JSJ decomposition of a divergent G–limit group, which encodes all of the graph of groups decompositions
that may arise through the limiting construction. We define modular groups of automorphisms, which is used
to develop an analogue of Sela’s ‘Shortening Argument’ in this setting. In Section 6 we study shortening
quotients, and prove a certain descending chain condition for shortening quotients (Theorem 6.8). This
allows us to prove Theorem B. In Section 7 we apply the machinery developed in previous sections, and
particularly Theorem B, to prove Theorem D.

Remark 1.1. Our approach in this paper is motivated by the methods of Sela from [36] (and many other
papers, for example [12, 13, 31]). As such, although our setting is quite different to these earlier works, many
of the technical details remain the same. Rather than add a considerable amount to the length of this paper,
we have not attempted to make this paper self-contained. Instead, we occasionally refer to other papers for
certain technical details, especially [16], [17] and [31], only indicating the changes required in the setting of
this paper. We apologize to the reader who is not already familiar with these earlier papers.

1.1. Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Henry Wilton for providing the simplified proof for
Example 3.14.
                        HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                5


                                             2. Preliminaries

  Throughout this paper, all actions of groups on metric spaces are by isometries and all metric spaces are
geodesic metric spaces.
Definition 2.1. A geodesic metric space is called δ–hyperbolic if for any geodesic triangle with sides p,
q, and r, p belongs to the closed δ–neighborhood of q ∪ r. In this case, we refer to δ as the hyperbolicity
constant of the space. A metric space is simply called hyperbolic if it is δ–hyperbolic for some δ ≥ 0.

  See [6, III.H] for many of the basic properties about δ–hyperbolic spaces.
  For a group Γ acting on a metric space X and a constant K, let
                                FixK (Γ) = {x ∈ X | d(x, gx) ≤ K ∀ g ∈ Γ}.
The following is a standard fact about hyperbolic metric spaces.
Lemma 2.2. Suppose a group Γ acts with bounded orbits on a δ–hyperbolic metric space X and ε > 0. Then
Fix4δ+2ε (Γ) 6= ∅.

Proof. The ǫ–quasi-centers for a bounded set Y ∈ X are the points in the collection
                                   Cǫ (Y ) = {y ∈ X | Y ⊂ B(y, rY + ǫ)} ,
where rY = inf {ρ > 0 | ∃z ∈ X : Y ⊆ B(z, ρ)}.
   Let x ∈ X. By assumption, the Γ–orbit Γ · x is bounded, hence for all ε > 0 the set of ε–quasi-centers is
non-empty and has diameter at most 4δ+2ε by [6, Chapter III.Γ, Lemma 3.3]. Since the set of ε–quasi-centers
of Γ · x is clearly Γ–invariant, the result follows.                                                      

  The following notion was introduced by Bowditch [5].
Definition 2.3. Let Γ be a group acting on a metric space (X, d). The action is called acylindrical if for
all ε there exist Nε and Rε such that for all x, y ∈ X with d(x, y) ≥ Rε ,
                                 |{g ∈ Γ | d(x, gx) ≤ ε, d(y, gy) ≤ ε}| ≤ Nε .

  We refer to the functions Nε and Rε as the acylindricity constants of the action.
Remark 2.4. The idea of an acylindrical action is intended (see [5]) to be related to Sela’s notion of a
k–acylindrical action on a tree [35]. However, unfortunately the notion in Definition 2.3 does not generalize
this notion from trees, but rather the notion of a (k, C)–acylindrical action.

   Given a group Γ acting on a hyperbolic metric space X, an element g ∈ Γ is called loxodromic if for some
(equivalently, any) point x ∈ X, the map Z → X defined by n → g n x is a quasi-isometric embedding. Such
an element g admits a bi-infinite quasi-geodesic axis on which g acts as a non-trivial translation. We denote
the limit points on ∂X of the axis of g by g +∞ and g −∞ . Given two loxodromic elements g and h, we say
they are independent if {g +∞ , g −∞ } ∩ {h+∞ , h−∞ } = ∅. The action of Γ on X is called non-elementary if
Γ contains two independent loxodromic elements. By a result of Gromov [11, 8.2.F], this is equivalent to Γ
containing infinitely many pairwise independent loxodromic elements.
Definition 2.5. [28, Definition 1.3] A group Γ is acylindrically hyperbolic if Γ admits a non-elementary,
acylindrical action on a δ–hyperbolic metric space.

  A group Γ acting on a metric space X is called elliptic if some (equivalently, any) Γ–orbit is bounded.
Theorem 2.6. [28, Theorem 1.1] Let Γ be a group acting acylindrically on a δ–hyperbolic metric space.
Then Γ satisfies exactly one of the following:
   (1) Γ is elliptic.
6                                            D. GROVES AND M. HULL


    (2) Γ is virtually cyclic and contains a loxodromic element.
    (3) Γ contains infinitely many pairwise independent loxodromic elements.

    In particular, this theorem implies that if Γ is acylindrically hyperbolic and H ≤ Γ, then either H is
elliptic, virtually cyclic, or acylindrically hyperbolic. A special case of this theorem is that every element of
Γ is either elliptic or loxodromic, a result first proved by Bowditch [5, Lemma 2.2]. The following result is
stated in [9] in the more general context of loxodromic WPD elements.
Lemma 2.7. [9, Lemma 6.5, Corollary 6.6] Let Γ be a group acting acylindrically on a δ–hyperbolic metric
space and let h ∈ Γ be a loxodromic element. Then h is contained in a unique maximal virtually cyclic
subgroup denoted EΓ (h). Furthermore, the following are equivalent for any g ∈ Γ:

    (1) g ∈ EΓ (h)
    (2) g −1 hm g = hk for some m, k ∈ Z \ {0}.
    (3) g −1 hn g = h±n for some n ∈ N.
In addition, for some r ∈ N,
                               EΓ+ (h) = {g ∈ Γ | ∃n ∈ N g −1 hn g = hn } = CΓ (hr ).

   In this article, we are interested in studying the set of homomorphisms from a finitely generated group G to
a family of groups. This perspective appeared in the work of Jaligot–Sela [22] who studied homomorphisms
to free products of groups. The following definition introduces the main class(es) of groups which we study.
Definition 2.8. Let G be a family of pairs (Γ, XΓ ) where Γ is a group and XΓ is a (geodesic) metric space
upon which Γ acts isometrically. We say that G is uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic if there exists δ ≥ 0
and functions Rε , Nε such that for each (Γ, XΓ ) ∈ G, the space XΓ is a δ–hyperbolic metric space on which Γ
acts acylindrically with acylindricity constants Rε and Nε . Further, we require that the action of at least one
Γ on XΓ is non-elementary. We say that δ is the hyperbolicity constant and Rε , Nε are the acylindricity
constants for the family G.
Remark 2.9. We usually refer to elements of G just via the group Γ, leaving the metric space XΓ implicit.
However, it is possible to apply the techniques in this paper to a single group and a collection of spaces upon
which this group acts in a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic way. An example of this approach appears in
[35] where Sela studies the set of all k–acylindrical actions of a fixed finitely generated group on simplicial
trees. In this paper, however, we are mostly interested in the groups in G, so we usually implicitly fix a single
space XΓ for each group. Therefore, we often use such expressions as ‘let Γ ∈ G’ and variants thereof.

   The requirement that some element of G admits a non-elementary action is included in Definition 2.8 to
ensure that Γ is acylindrically hyperbolic (with an acylindrically hyperbolic action on XΓ ) if and only if
{(Γ, XΓ )} is uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic. Note that a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family G
may contain groups which are not acylindrically hyperbolic. For example, G may consist of all subgroups of
a fixed acylindrically hyperbolic group (all acting on the same space).
   More examples of acylindrically hyperbolic families of groups include: any finite collection of acylindrically
hyperbolic groups, the family of all groups which decompose as a non-trivial free product, more generally the
class of all groups which admit a k–acylindrical action on a tree for a fixed k. This last example includes the
family of all fundamental groups of compact 3–manifolds. Indeed, if a compact 3–manifold M is reducible
then π1 (M ) splits as a free product corresponding to the Kneser–Milnor decomposition of M and we set
Xπ1 (M) to be the Bass–Serre tree dual to this decomposition. If M is irreducible, then we set Xπ1 (M) to
be the Bass–Serre tree dual to the JSJ decomposition of M (which may be a point if this decomposition is
trivial). As noted in the introduction, the action of π1 (M ) on Xπ1 (M) is 4–acylindrical. On the other hand,
the family of all hyperbolic groups is not uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic because this would violate
Lemma 2.10 below.
                         HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                       7


  The next result follows from the proof of [28, Lemma 6.8]. In [28] it is stated for a single acylindrically
hyperbolic group, but it is easy to see from the proof that the constant only depends on the hyperbolicity
and acylindricity constants.
Lemma 2.10. Let G be a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family of groups. Then there exists K such
that for any Γ ∈ G and any loxodromic h ∈ Γ, every finite subgroup of EΓ (h) has order at most K.

  The following is [28, Lemma 3.6]; it is clear from the proof that all the constants depend only on the
hyperbolicity and acylindricity constants for Γ, so the result holds for our uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic
family G.
Lemma 2.11. Let G be a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family. For all ε > 0 there exist N and R such
that for any (Γ, XΓ ) ∈ G and for any x, y ∈ XΓ with d(x, y) ≥ R,
                               |{g ∈ Γ | d(x, gx) ≤ ε, d(y, gy) ≤ d(x, y) + ε}| ≤ N.

                        3. Equationally noetherian families and limit groups

   In this section we discuss what it means for a group to be equationally noetherian and some of the basic
consequences of this property. We then define what it means for a family G of groups to be equationally
noetherian (see Definition A below). We also introduce G–limit groups, and relate properties of them to G
being equationally noetherian.
   Let Γ be a group, n a natural number and Fn = F (x1 , ..., xn ) the free group of rank n. Given W ∈ Γ ∗ Fn
and (g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ Γn , let W (g1 , ..., gn ) be the element of Γ obtained by replacing each occurrence of xi with
gi and each occurrence of x−1    i    with gi−1 . For a subset S ⊆ Γ ∗ Fn , define VΓ (S) by
                            VΓ (S) = {(g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ Γn | W (g1 , ..., gn ) = 1 ∀W ∈ S}.

   We think of W ∈ Fn ∗ Γ as defining an equation in the variables x1 , .., xn , with constants from the group
Γ, S as a system of equations and VΓ (S) as the algebraic set of solutions to the system of equations. There
is a canonical copy of Fn in Γ ∗ Fn , and an equation W is coefficient-free if W ∈ Fn .
    For any (g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ Γn , there is an associated homomorphism η : Γ ∗ Fn → Γ which is the identity on
Γ and which sends each xi to gi . Then (g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ VΓ (S) if and only if S ⊆ ker(η). In particular, for any
homomorphism η : Γ ∗ Fn → Γ, (η(x1 ), ...η(xn )) ∈ VΓ (ker(η)). Note also that (g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ VΓ (S) if and only
if xi 7→ gi induces a homomorphism (Γ ∗ Fn )/hhSii → Γ. Hence there is a one to one correspondence between
the algebraic set of solutions VΓ (S) to the system of equations S and Hom(G, Γ) where G = (Γ ∗ Fn )/hhSii.
Definition 3.1. A group Γ is equationally noetherian if for any natural number n and any S ⊆ Γ ∗ Fn ,
there exists a finite S0 ⊆ S such that VΓ (S0 ) = VΓ (S).

   The equationally noetherian property is a group-theoretic version of the conclusion of the Hilbert Basis
Theorem. The Hilbert Basis Theorem easily implies that all finitely generated linear groups are equationally
noetherian (see, for example [2]). Using linearity, Guba showed that free groups are equationally noetherian
[15]. Sela showed that torsion-free hyperbolic groups are equationally noetherian [37], and Sela’s methods
have been expanded to show that hyperbolic groups with torsion [31], toral relatively hyperbolic groups
[12], and free products of equationally noetherian groups [38] are all equationally noetherian. Some solvable
groups, including free solvable groups and rigid groups were shown to be equationally noetherian by Gupta
and Romanovskiı̆ [19, 33]. In work in preparation, the first author proves that the mapping class group of a
surface of finite type is equationally noetherian.
   It is well-known that every equationally noetherian group is Hopfian. Since being equationally noetherian
is closed under taking subgroups, any group which contains a non-Hopfian subgroup is not equationally
noetherian. In particular there exist acylindrically hyperbolic groups, such as Z ∗ BS(2, 3), which are not
equationally noetherian.
8                                              D. GROVES AND M. HULL


   Next we define G–limit groups, where G is a family of groups. Other versions of these definitions are often
stated only for stable sequences of homomorphisms. There is no real loss of generality here, since one can
always turn a sequence of homomorphisms into a stable sequence by passing to a subsequence. However, we
prefer to use to language of ultrafilters instead of frequently passing to subsequences.
Definition 3.2. An ultrafilter is a finitely additive probability measure ω : 2N → {0, 1}. An ultrafilter ω is
called non-principal if ω(F ) = 0 for any finite F ⊂ N. We say a subset A ⊆ N is ω–large if ω(A) = 1 and
ω–small if ω(A) = 0. Given a statement P which depends on some index i, we say that P holds ω–almost
surely if P holds for an ω–large set of indices.

   For the remainder ofSthis paper, we fix a non-principal ultrafilter ω. When G is a group and G is a family
of groups, we denote     Hom(G, Γ) by Hom(G, G).
                       Γ∈G

Definition 3.3. Let G be a family of groups, G a finitely generated group, and (ϕi ) a sequence from
Hom(G, G). The ω–kernel of the sequence (ϕi ) is
                                 kerω (ϕi ) = {g ∈ G | ϕi (g) = 1 ω–almost surely}.

   A G–limit group is a group of the form L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) for some sequence (ϕi ) from Hom(G, G). Let
ϕ∞ : G ։ L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) denote the natural quotient map. We refer to ϕ∞ as the limit map associated to
the sequence (ϕi ). We refer to the sequence (ϕi ) as a defining sequence of homomorphisms for the G–limit
group L.

    If G = {Γ}, a single group, then we talk about Γ–limit groups.
Definition 3.4. A G–limit group L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) where ϕi : G → Γi is strict if either ω–almost surely the
groups Γi are distinct (i.e. non-isomorphic), or else ω–almost surely the Γi are equal to a fixed Γ ∈ G and
the homomorphisms ϕi and ϕj are ω–almost surely distinct modulo conjugation in Γ.

   Note that non-strict G–limit groups are isomorphic to subgroups of elements of G. Some strict G–limit
groups may also be (isomorphic to) subgroups of elements of G.
  The follow equivalences are well-known, for example (1) =⇒ (4) appears in [2, Proposition 3]. However,
we are not aware of a reference in the literature which includes all of them.
Theorem 3.5. Let ω be a non-principal ultrafilter.The following are equivalent for any group Γ:
     (1) For any natural number n and any S ⊆ Fn , there is a finite subset S0 ⊆ S such that VΓ (S0 ) = VΓ (S).
     (2) For any finitely generated group G and any sequence of homomorphisms (ϕi : G → Γ), ϕi ω–almost
         surely factors through the limit map ϕ∞ .
     (3) For any finitely generated group G and any sequence of homomorphisms (ϕi : G → Γ), some ϕi
         factors through the limit map ϕ∞ .
     (4) Γ is equationally noetherian.

Proof. (2) =⇒ (3) and (4) =⇒ (1) are trivial.
   (1) =⇒ (2): First, it suffices to assume G = Fn . Indeed, since G is finitely generated we can fix some
quotient map h : Fn ։ G and consider the sequence (ηi ) where ηi = ϕi ◦ h. If ηi factors through η∞ , then
ker(ϕ∞ ◦ h) = ker(η∞ ) ⊆ ker(ηi ) = ker(ϕi ◦ h), and hence ker(ϕ∞ ) ⊆ ker(ϕi ).
   Now assume G = Fn and let S = kerω (ϕi ) = ker(ϕ∞ ). By assumption, there exists finite subset S0 ⊆ S
such that VΓ (S0 ) = VΓ (S). But since S0 is finite and ω is finitely additive, ω–almost surely S0 ⊆ ker(ϕi ),
hence VΓ (ker(ϕi )) ⊆ VΓ (S0 ) = VΓ (S) ω–almost surely. For such i, (ϕi (x1 ), ..., ϕi (xn )) ∈ VΓ (ker(ϕi )) ⊆ VΓ (S),
so if W ∈ S = ker(ϕ∞ ), then ϕi (W ) = W (ϕi (x1 ), ..., ϕi (xn )) = 1 in Γ, and hence ker(ϕ∞ ) ⊆ ker(ϕi ). Thus
ϕi ω–almost surely factors through ϕ∞ .
   (3) =⇒ (4): Let S = {W1 , W2 , ...} ⊆ Γ∗Fn , and let Si = {W1 , ..., Wi } ⊆ S. Suppose that VΓ (Si ) 6= VΓ (S)
for all i. Then there exists ϕi : Γ ∗ Fn → Γ such that ϕi restricts to the identity map on Γ and Si ⊆ ker(ϕi )
                        HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                       9


but S 6⊂ ker(ϕi ). Notice that S ⊆ ker(ϕ∞ ) = kerω (ϕi ) since Wi ∈ ker(ϕj ) for all j ≥ i. By assumption,
some ϕi |Fn factors through ϕ∞ |Fn , since ϕi and ϕ∞ are both the identity on Γ if follows that ϕi factors
through ϕ∞ . But this implies that S ⊆ ker(ϕ∞ ) ⊆ ker(ϕi ), a contradiction. Therefore, Γ is equationally
noetherian.                                                                                             

   We now recall from the introduction how to extend these notions to define what it means for a family of
groups G to be equationally noetherian. Given S ⊆ Fn , let

                      VG (S) = {(g1 , ..., gn ) ∈ Γn | Γ ∈ G and W (g1 , ..., gn ) = 1 ∀W ∈ S}.
Definition A. We say that a family G is an equationally noetherian family of groups if for any n and any
S ⊆ Fn , there exists a finite S0 ⊆ S such that VG (S0 ) = VG (S).
Remark 3.6. In order to consider equations with coefficients for a family of groups, one would need to
consider families of groups G such that each element of G is equipped with a fixed embedding of some fixed
coefficient group Γ. We do not use this perspective in this paper.
Theorem 3.7. The following are equivalent for any family of groups G:
    (1) G is equationally noetherian.
    (2) For any finitely generated group G and any sequence of homomorphisms (ϕi ) from Hom(G, G), ϕi
        factors through the limit map ϕ∞ ω–almost surely.
    (3) For any finitely generated group G and any sequence of homomorphisms (ϕi ) from Hom(G, G), some
        ϕi factors through the limit map ϕ∞ .

Proof. The proof is identical to Theorem 3.5 with Γ replaced by groups Γi from G.                                 

  The following are obvious.
Lemma 3.8. Any union of finitely many equationally noetherian families is equationally noetherian.
Lemma 3.9. If G is an equationally noetherian family of groups, then the collection of all subgroups of
elements of G is equationally noetherian.
Lemma 3.10. If G is equationally noetherian and G ′ ⊆ G, then G ′ is equationally noetherian.

   The Hilbert Basis Theorem implies that for any field K, the linear group GLn (K) is equationally noether-
ian (see [2, Theorem B1]). Combining this observation with the previous lemmas, we get some natural geo-
metric families of groups, such as the family of fundamental groups of finite volume hyperbolic 3–manifolds,
more generally the family of all Kleinian groups, and the family of all subgroups of a fixed (linear) Lie group.
   Theorem 3.12 below shows that when G is equationally noetherian, there is no infinite descending chain
of G–limit groups. When G consists of a single group, this is [29, Theorem 2.7]. The proof for a family of
group is essentially the same. We first record the following elementary observation.
Lemma 3.11. Suppose L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) and {y1 , ..., yn } is a finite generating set for L. Let {x1 , ..., xn } be a
free generating set for Fn . Then there exists ϕ′i ∈ Hom(Fn , G) such that L = Fn / kerω (ϕ′i ) and ϕ′∞ (xj ) = yj
for 1 ≤ j ≤ n.

Proof. Let Z̃ be a finite generating set for G and let Z = ϕ∞ (Z̃). Since Z generates L, each yj can be written
as a word Wj in Z. Let W    fj be the word obtained by replacing each letter z in Wj with some z̃ ∈ ϕ−1 (z) ∩ Z̃.
                                                                                                     ∞
Define β : Fn → G by β(xj ) = W     fj , and let ϕ′ = ϕi ◦ β. By definition, ϕ∞ ◦ β induces an injective map
                                                  i
Fn / kerω (ϕ′i ) → L, and this map is also surjective because its image contains the generating set {y1 , ..., yn }.
Hence Fn / kerω (ϕ′i ) is isomorphic to L. Furthermore, it follows from the construction that ϕ′∞ = ϕ∞ ◦ β, so
ϕ′∞ (xj ) = Wj = yj .
                                                                                                                  
10                                             D. GROVES AND M. HULL


Theorem 3.12. Suppose G is an equationally noetherian family of groups (αj : Lj ։ Lj+1 ) is a sequence of
surjective homomorphisms where each Lj is a G–limit group. Then αj is an isomorphism for all but finitely
many j.

Proof. Let (ϕji : Fn → Γji ) be a defining sequence of maps for Lj , that is each Γji ∈ G and Fn / kerω (ϕji ) = Lj .
We further assume that these maps are chosen such that the following diagram commutes for all j ≥ 1:
                                                              ϕj∞
                                                        Fn ❉        / Lj
                                                            ❉❉
                                                                ❉❉ αj
                                                              ❉❉
                                                           j+1
                                                          ϕ∞      ❉! 
                                                                  Lj+1


    We can find such defining sequences by Lemma 3.11. In particular, this means that ker(ϕ1∞ ) ⊆ ker(ϕ2∞ ) ⊆
..., that is the kernels of the maps ϕj∞ form an increasing sequence. Let S = ∪∞               j
                                                                                      j=1 ker(ϕ∞ ), and let S0 be a
finite subset of S such that VG (S0 ) = VG (S). Since S0 is finite, there is some k such that S0 ⊆ ∪kj=1 ker(ϕj∞ ) =
ker(ϕk∞ ). We show that S ⊆ ker(ϕk∞ ) which implies that for all j ≥ k, αj is an isomorphism.
     Since S0 ⊆ ker(ϕk∞ ) and S0 is finite, ω–almost surely S0 ⊆ ker(ϕki ). For each such i,
                                           VG (ker(ϕki )) ⊆ VG (S0 ) = VG (S)
Thus, for such i (ϕki (x1 ), ..., ϕki (xn )) ∈ VG (S) hence if W ∈ S, ϕki (W ) = W (ϕki (x1 ), ..., ϕki (xn )) = 1. Since
this holds ω–almost surely, W ∈ ker(ϕk∞ ). Thus S ⊆ ker(ϕk∞ ).                                                         

   Note that since each element of G is a G–limit group, the above theorem also implies that there is no
infinite descending chain of proper epimorphisms of the form
                                                    Γ1 ։ Γ2 ։ · · ·
with each Γi ∈ G. This can be viewed as a generalized Hopfian property for families of groups, hence
the above generalizes the well-known fact that every equationally noetherian group is Hopfian. Similarly,
applying Theorem 3.12 in the case where each Li is isomorphic to a fixed group yields the following corollary
(cf. [29, Corollary 2.9]).
Corollary 3.13. If G is an equationally noetherian family of groups, then every G–limit group is Hopfian.
In particular, every element of G is Hopfian.

   There are, however, examples of Hopfian groups which are not equationally noetherian, for example
any simple group which contains BS(2, 3). Similarly, there are families of groups which satisfy the above
generalization of the Hopfian property but are not equationally noetherian families. One such example is
the family of all finite groups. We thank Henry Wilton for pointing out the following proof (we had in mind
a more complicated proof).
Example 3.14. The family of all finite groups is not equationally noetherian.

Proof. In an answer to [21], Yves de Cornulier (user YCor) constructs a non-Hopfian group as a limit of
virtually free groups. It is straightforward to see, using the fact that virtually free groups are residually
finite, that such a group is also a limit of finite groups. Hence the family of all finite groups cannot be
equationally noetherian by Corollary 3.13.                                                                 

   It follows that any family of groups which contains all finite groups is not equationally noetherian; for
example, the collection of all residually finite groups, the collection of all hyperbolic groups, and the collection
of all linear groups are not equationally noetherian.
Example 3.15. The collection of all torsion-free hyperbolic groups is not equationally noetherian.
                          HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                            11


Proof. There is a sequence of torsion-free hyperbolic groups Γ1 ։ Γ2 ։ ... such that the direct limit of this
sequence Γ∞ is an infinite, non-abelian group with the property that every proper, non-trivial subgroup of
Γ∞ is infinite cyclic [11, 26]. In particular, Γ∞ is not hyperbolic, thus the family of all torsion-free hyperbolic
groups is not equationally noetherian by Theorem 3.12.                                                           

   These examples show that a family of groups being equationally noetherian is a much stronger property
than each of the groups in the family being equationally noetherian.
Example 3.16. Suppose that G is a Hopfian group which is not equationally noetherian. For example,
G might be an infinite simple group containing BS(2, 3), as mentioned above. Simplicity clearly implies G
is Hopfian, while G cannot be equationally noetherian since it contains non-equationally noetherian (even
non-Hopfian) subgroups.
   If Γ = G∗Z, then Γ is hyperbolic relative to a Hopfian subgroup, but Γ is not equationally noetherian. This
example indicates that our techniques (inspired by Sela’s) will not be able to prove that a group hyperbolic
relative to Hopfian subgroups is Hopfian.
Question 3.17. Suppose that G is a Hopfian group and Γ = G ∗ Z. Is Γ Hopfian?

   Next we make a few more observations about G–limit groups in the case where G is equationally noetherian.
A group G is called fully residually G if for any finite subset F ⊆ G \ {1}, there exists ϕ ∈ Hom(G, G) such
that ker(ϕ) ∩ F = ∅. The group G is called residually G if this holds whenever F consists of a single element
of G \ {1}.
   The following is well-known when G consists of a single group, and the proof is the same in general.
Lemma 3.18. Let G be a family of groups. Then any finitely generated fully residually G group is a G–limit
group. If G is an equationally noetherian family then any G–limit group is fully residually G.

Proof. If L is finitely generated and fully residually G, then there exists a sequence (ϕi ) from Hom(L, G) such
that ϕi is injective on the ball of radius i in L, hence kerω (ϕi ) = {1}. Thus L = L/ kerω (ϕi ) is a G–limit
group.
   Now suppose L = G/ kerω (ϕi ), for maps ϕi : G → Γi (with Γi ∈ G). Then by Theorem 3.5.(2) ϕi
ω–almost surely factors through ϕ∞ , hence there are maps ηi : L → Γi such that ϕi = ηi ◦ ϕ∞ . Then
ker(ϕ∞ ) = kerω (ϕi ) = kerω (ηi ◦ ϕ∞ ), thus kerω (ηi ) = {1}. It follows that for any finite subset F ⊆ L \ {1},
there exists some ηi such that F ∩ ker(ηi ) = ∅, hence L is fully residually G.                                 

    In particular when G is an equationally noetherian family a finitely generated group L is a G–limit group
if and only if there exists a sequence (ϕi ) from Hom(L, G) with kerω (ϕi ) = {1}.
   Lemma 3.19 below is needed in Sections 6 and 7. Given a group G and subgroups P1 , ..., Pn of G, G is
said to be finitely generated relative to the subgroups {P1 , ..., Pn } if there is a finite set S ⊆ G such that
S ∪ P1 ∪ ... ∪ Pn generates G. In this case, there is a natural surjective homomorphism F (S) ∗ P1 ∗ ... ∗ Pn ։ G
(where F (S) is the free group on S) which is the identity when restricted to S and to each Pi . If the kernel
of this homomorphism is normally generated by a finite set, then G is said to be finitely presented relative
to subgroups {P1 , ..., Pn }.
Lemma 3.19. Suppose that the sequence (ϕi ) from Hom(G, G) is such that the limit group L = G/ kerω (ϕi )
is finitely presented relative to subgroups {P1 , ..., Pn }. Suppose further that for each Pj , there is subgroup
Pej ≤ G which ϕ∞ maps onto Pj such that ϕi |Pej factors through ϕ∞ |Pej ω–almost surely. Then ϕi factors
through ϕ∞ ω–almost surely.

Proof. Let S be a finite generating set of G and let F (S) denote the free group on S. Then there are natural
surjective maps α : F (S) ∗ (∗ni=1 Pei ) ։ G, β : F (S) ∗ (∗ni=1 Pi ) ։ L, and γ : F (S) ∗ (∗ni=1 Pei ) ։ F (S) ∗ (∗ni=1 Pi )
12                                            D. GROVES AND M. HULL


which fit into the commutative diagram:
                                                                   α
                                            F (S) ∗ (∗nj=1 Pej ) −−−−→ G
                                                                      
                                                  γy
                                                                       ϕ∞
                                                                       y
                                                                  β
                                            F (S) ∗ (∗nj=1 Pj ) −−−−→ L

  The assumption that L is finitely presented relative to {P1 , ..., Pn } means that ker(β) is normally generated
                       e be a finite subset of F (S) ∗ (∗n Pej ) which γ maps onto R. Also, ker(γ) is normally
by a finite set R. Let R                                 j=1                                                     !
               Sn
                                                                                          e  S    S
                                                                                                  n
generated by      ker(ϕ∞ |Pej ). Thus, ker(β ◦ γ) = ker(ϕ∞ ◦ α) is normally generated by R          ker(ϕ∞ |Pej )
              j=1                                                                                  j=1

   Clearly ker(ϕ∞ ◦ α) = kerω (ϕi ◦ α). Since R e is finite, R
                                                             e ⊆ ker(ϕi ◦ α) ω–almost surely. By assumption,
ω–almost surely ker(ϕ∞ |Pej ) ⊆ ker(ϕi |Pej ).

   Since ker(ϕ∞ ◦ α) is normally generated by R    e S(Sn ker(ϕ∞ | e )), we see ker(ϕ∞ ◦ α) ⊆ ker(ϕi ◦ α)
                                                          j=1        Pj
ω–almost surely. Since α is surjective this implies that ω–almost surely ker(ϕ∞ ) ⊆ ker(ϕi ). Hence ω–almost
surely ϕi factors through ϕ∞ .                                                                            

                                  4. Limit actions and the Rips machine

   Throughout this section, let G be a fixed uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family of groups and for each
Γ ∈ G, let XΓ denote the associated hyperbolic metric space on which Γ acts acylindrically. In this section
we consider divergent G–limit groups (see Definition 4.2), which we show come equipped with a limiting
action on an R–tree. We investigate the basic properties of this action.

4.1. Limiting R–trees. Recall that we fixed a non-principal ultrafilter ω. We next discuss some basic
properties of ω–limits. See [40] for more information. Given a sequence of real numbers (ai ), we de-
fine limω (ai ) = a if for all ε > 0, ω ({i | |a − ai | < ε}) = 1. Similarly, limω (ai ) = ∞ if for all N > 0,
ω ({i | ai > N }) = 1. It is easy to see that the ω–limit of the sequence (ai ) is equal to the ordinary limit of
some subsequence.

Q Let (Xi , di ) be a sequence of metric spaces together with fixed base points oωi ∈ Xi . On the product
   Xi we define an equivalence relation ∼ by saying (xi ) ∼ (yi ) if and only if lim di (xi , yi ) = 0. Then the
ultra-limit of the metric spaces Xi with basepoints oi is defined as
                                                         Q
                                                {(xi ) ∈ Xi | lim ω di (oi , xi ) < ∞}
                             lim ω (Xi , oi ) =                                           .
                                                                ∼
                                                              ω
This space has the metric d defined by d((xi ), (y Qi )) = lim di (xi , yi ). It is straightforward to check that this
is a well-defined metric. For a sequence (xi ) ∈ Xi , we say the sequence is visible if limω di (oi , xi ) < ∞. In
this case we often denote the image of (xi ) in the ultra-limit by limω xi .
   It is well-known that if each Xi is a geodesic metric space then limω (Xi , oi ) is a geodesic metric space
(see, for example, the proof of [40, Proposition 4.2(b)] which works in this generality). The following lemma
goes back in spirit to a construction of Paulin [30] (cf. [3], [7]). Using the modern construction involving
asymptotic cones it is straightforward.
Lemma 4.1. Suppose each Xi is a δi –hyperbolic metric space and limω δi < ∞. Then limω (Xi , oi ) is a
limω δi –hyperbolic metric space.

   Suppose G is generated by a finite set S. Let (ϕi : G → Γi ) be a sequence of homomorphisms where
Γi ∈ G, and suppose that Xi := XΓi has metric di . Define a scaling factor
                                          kϕi k = inf max di (x, ϕi (s)x).
                                                  x∈Xi s∈S
                          HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                   13


Definition 4.2. The sequence (ϕi ) is called divergent if limω kϕi k = ∞. In this case, the associated G–limit
group L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) is called a divergent G–limit group.

   Note that if G = {Γ}, where Γ is a single hyperbolic group acting on its Cayley graph, then a sequence of
homomorphisms (ϕi : G → Γ) is divergent if and only if the ϕi do not lie in finitely many conjugacy classes.
Thus, in this case the notion of strict Γ–limit groups and divergent Γ–limit groups are the same. On the
other hand, in general the difference between strict and divergent G–limit groups causes many complications.
We note that this is unavoidable, since for any group H there is an acylindrically hyperbolic group Γ which
contains H as an elliptic subgroup (for example, Γ = Z ∗ H). This means that every H–limit group L occurs
as a non-divergent Γ–limit group, and if L is a strict H–limit group it is also be a strict Γ–limit group.
Hence, without additional assumptions on G non-divergent G–limit groups can be completely arbitrary.
   Fix a divergent G–limit group L, with defining sequence (ϕi : G → Γi ). For an element g ∈ L, let ge denote
some element of ϕ−1∞ (g). The element g e is not unique, but the statements which use this notation never
depend on the choice. Similarly, for a subgroup H ≤ L, let H e be a subgroup of G which maps surjectively
onto H. When H is finitely generated we also choose H e to be finitely generated, by lifting a finite generating
set and considering the subgroup generated by these lifts.
Definition 4.3. Given a subgroup H ≤ L, we call H stably elliptic (with respect to the defining sequence
                             e on Xi is ω–almost surely elliptic, and H is locally stably elliptic (with respect
(ϕi )) if the action of ϕi (H)
to (ϕi )) if this holds for every finitely generated subgroup of H.
   Let SE(L) and LSE(L) denote the set of stably elliptic and locally stably elliptic subgroups of L (with
respect to (ϕi )). Let N LSE(L) denote the set of subgroups of L which are not locally stably elliptic (with
respect to (ϕi )).

   The sets SE(L), LSE(L), and N LSE(L) all depend on both L and on the defining sequence (ϕi ), but
since the defining sequence is usually fixed we suppress this from the notation.
    If H is finitely generated then stably elliptic and locally stably elliptic are equivalent notions. However,
for non-finitely generated groups stably elliptic implies locally stably elliptic, but there may be locally stably
elliptic subgroups which are not stably elliptic.
  The following theorem is a standard application of well-known methods which go back to the work of
Paulin [30].
Theorem 4.4. Suppose that G is a finitely generated group and that (ϕi ) is a divergent sequence from
Hom(G, G). Then G admits a non-trivial, minimal action on an R–tree T. Furthermore, the action of G on
T induces a non-trivial, minimal action of the corresponding G–limit group L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) on T .

Proof. Recall that kϕi k = inf max di (x, ϕi (s)x), where S is a finite generating set for G. In most cases we
                             x∈Xi s∈S
are interested in, we can choose a point oi ∈ Xi which realizes this infimum. If no such point exists, we let
oi ∈ Xi such that max di (oi , ϕi (s)oi ) ≤ kϕi k + 1i .
                    s∈S

   Since each Xi is δ–hyperbolic, after rescaling the metric by kϕ1i k we get a space which is δ/kϕi k–hyperbolic.
We denote the rescaled space by Xi /kϕi k. By Lemma 4.1, limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ) is 0–hyperbolic and hence an
R–tree. The action of G on limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ) is defined by g limω xi = limω ϕi (g)xi ; it is straightforward to
check that this is a well-defined isometric action. Now given a point x = limω xi ∈ limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ) , for
each xi there is a generator of G si ∈ S such that di (xi , ϕi (si )xi ) ≥ kϕi k. Since S is finite, ω–almost surely
si is equal to some fixed s ∈ S. It follows that d(x, sx) ≥ 1, hence sx 6= x. This shows that the action of G
on limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ) is non-trivial.
   We now get the desired tree T by choosing a minimal G–invariant subtree of limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ). (Note
that unless limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ) is a line, the action of G on limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ) cannot be minimal since G is
finitely generated and limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ) is an R–tree of uncountable valence).
14                                                D. GROVES AND M. HULL


   Finally, note that each element of kerω (ϕi ) acts trivially on T . Hence the action of G on T induces an
action of L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) on T .                                                                         

Definition 4.5. [4, Definition 3.1] When a group G is acting on an R–tree T , an arc of T is stable if the
stabilizer of every non-degenerate subarc is equal to the stabilizer of the whole arc. Otherwise, the arc is
unstable.

   The following lemma is the key ingredient which allows us to apply the Rips machine to the actions of
divergent limit groups on the associated R–trees. Parts of it are proved in [39, Theorem 2.2.1], and our proof
is similar to the proof of [31, Theorem 1.16].
Convention 4.6. In the following lemma, and for the remainder of this section, uniformly finite means that
it is bounded by a constant which depends only on δ and the acylindricity functions Nǫ and Rǫ .

   In the next section (see Standing Assumption 5.8), we make a choice of number C so that all uniformly
finite numbers from this section are less than C.
Lemma 4.7. (Stability Lemma) Let L be a divergent G–limit group and T the corresponding R–tree given
by Theorem 4.4. Then the action of L on T satisfies:
     (1) If H ≤ L stabilizes a non-trivial arc of T, then H is (uniformly finite)-by-abelian.
     (2) If H ≤ L preserves a line in T and fixes its ends, then H is (uniformly finite)-by-abelian.
     (3) Stabilizers of tripods are uniformly finite. Consequently if T is not a line, then the kernel of the
         action of L on T is uniformly finite.
     (4) The stabilizer of an unstable arc is uniformly finite.
     (5) Every finitely generated element of SE(L) fixes a point in T .
     (6) If H ∈ LSE(L) fixes a non-degenerate arc in T then H is uniformly finite.
Remark 4.8. If the elements of G are torsion-free, then L is torsion-free which allows one to replace
“uniformly finite” with “trivial” everywhere in this lemma.

Proof. Throughout the proof, we suppose that L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) for some finitely generated group G and
some divergent sequence of homomorphisms (ϕi : G → Γi ) with Γi ∈ G. Let (Xi , di ) be the δ–hyperbolic
space upon which Γi acts acylindrically.
    (1) Let H ≤ L be a subgroup which stabilizes a non-trivial arc [x, y] of T , where x = limω xi and
y = limω yi . Fix ε1 = 28δ, and let N1 = Nε1 and R1 = Rε1 be given by Definition 2.3. Let
g1 , ..., gN1 +1 , h1 , ..., hN1 +1 be elements of H, and choose lifts gej , hej to G. Let F = {gj , hj | 1 ≤ j ≤ N1 + 1}
and F̃ = {g˜j , h˜j | 1 ≤ j ≤ N1 + 1}. We have
                                                            di (xi , yi )
                                                    lim ω                 6= 0.
                                                               kϕi k
On the other hand, for each j ∈ {1, . . . , N1 + 1} we have
                                        di (xi , ϕi (gej )xi )         di (xi , ϕi (hej )xi )
                                lim ω                          = lim ω                        = 0.
                                               kϕi k                           kϕi k
Therefore, for each f˜ ∈ F̃ , ω–almost surely we have
                                                                 1
                                         di (xi , ϕi (f˜)xi ) <     di (xi , yi ),
                                                                100
                                                                 1
                                         di (yi , ϕi (f˜)yi ) <     di (xi , yi ), and
                                                                100
                                                                 1
                                                         R1 <       di (xi , yi ).
                                                                100
                           HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                               15


   Now choose points pi , qi ∈ [xi , yi ] such that for any f˜ ∈ F̃ , ω–almost surely we have
                                   di (pi , xi ) ≥ di (xi , ϕi (f˜)xi ) + 2δ,
                                   di (pi , yi ) > di (qi , yi ) ≥ di (yi , ϕi (f˜)yi ) + 2δ, and
                                   di (pi , qi ) ≥ R1 .

                                                         gj , e
From this it follows that ω–almost surely, di (pi , ϕi ([e                                     gj , e
                                                              hj ])pi ) ≤ ε1 and di (qi , ϕi ([e    hj ])qi ) ≤ ε1 for all
1 ≤ j ≤ N1 + 1, hence by the definition of acylindricity the commutators are not all distinct. It follows
that H contains at most N1 commutators. Note that g h = g[g, h], so if there are at most N1 commutators
in H then any element of H has at most N1 distinct conjugates. Thus, H is N1 –BFC in the language of
[42], which means that by [42, Theorem 4.7] there is some K depending only on N1 so that |H ′ | ≤ K. The
statement (1) follows immediately.
   (2) Let Y be the line in T that is preserved by H. Choose a finite set F ⊂ H as in the proof of (1). For
such F , we can choose x, y ∈ Y such that d(x, y) is sufficiently large compared to the translation length of
any element of F . The proof can then be completed in the same way as (1).
   (3) Suppose H stabilizes a non-trivial tripod with vertices x = limω xi , y = limω yi , and z = limω zi . Let
ε2 = 14δ, and let N2 = Nε2 and R2 = Rε2 be the associated acylindricity constants from Definition 2.3.
Choose a geodesic [xi , yi ] in Xi and let ci be the point on [xi , yi ] that minimizes the distance to zi . Then
for any h ∈ H and any lift e  h of h, ω–almost surely we have (see, for example, [32, Lemma 4.1])
                                                     di (ci , ϕi (e
                                                                  h)ci ) ≤ 10δ.
As in the proof of (1), we can choose pi ∈ [xi , ci ] such that d(xi , pi ) ≥ d(xi , ϕi (e          hxi )) + 2δ and d(pi , ci ) ≥
max{R2 , 12δ}. Then d(ϕi (e    h)pi , [xi , ci ]) ≤ 2δ and di (pi , ci ) − 10δ ≤ di (ϕi (e
                                                                                         h)pi , ci ) ≤ di (pi , ci ) + 10δ. Hence
di (pi , ϕi (e
             h)pi ) ≤ 14δ. Repeating this argument with N2 + 1 elements of H, we find repetition amongst the
elements and by acylindricity we have |H| ≤ N2 .
   (4) This is the same as [31, Theorem 1.16(4)] (which in turn is very similar to [32, Proposition 4.2]).
Suppose [a, b] ⊂ [x, y] and g ∈ StabL ([a, b]) but gx 6= x. Then (x, y, gx) are the endpoints of a non-trivial
tripod in T . If h ∈ StabL ([x, y]), then hgx = [h, g]ghx = [h, g]gx. Now [h, g] belongs to the commutator
subgroup of StabL ([a, b]), which is uniformly finite by (1). Hence the StabL ([x, y])–orbit of gx is uniformly
finite, and so a uniformly finite index subgroup of StabL ([x, y]) fixes gx and hence fixes the whole tripod
spanned by (x, y, gx). Thus StabL ([x, y]) is uniformly finite by (3).
    (5) Let H = hh1 , ..., hn i be a finitely generated element of SE(L), and let oi ∈ Xi be the basepoint. Fix
hej ∈ ϕ−1                e      f      f                                     e
        ∞ (hj ) and let H = hh1 , ..., hn i. Let Mj be the word length of hj with respect to the given generators
of G and let M = max1≤j≤n {Mj }. Since each generator of G moves oi by at most kϕi k + 1i , by induction
on word length we have di (oi , ϕi (hej )oi ) ≤ Mj (kϕi k + 1i ) ≤ M (kϕi k + 1i ).
                   e is ω–almost surely elliptic, the orbit ϕi (H)·o
    Since each ϕi (H)                                           e i is bounded and hence has a 1–quasi-center
               e                                                                          e
qi . Since ϕi (H) preserves the set of 1–quasi-centers, Lemma 2.2 implies that the ϕi (H)–orbit   of qi is bounded
                                                                                     ω
by 4δ + 2. If the sequence (qi ) is visible in the ultra-limit, then the point lim qi is fixed by H (note that
this is true even if H is not finitely generated). In case the sequence (qi ) is not visible we work with another
sequence (pi ) constructed below.
   Without loss of generality, we suppose the indices are chosen such that ω–almost surely
                                                    f1 )oi ) = max {di (oi , ϕi (hej )oi )}.
                                       di (oi , ϕi (h
                                                               1≤j≤n

Let pi be the point on [oi , qi ] such that di (oi , pi ) = di (oi , ϕi (e
                                                                         h1 )oi )+2δ+1 or set pi = qi if no such point exists.
                                                                       (oi ,pi )
In particular, di (oi , pi ) ≤ M kϕi k + M + 2δ + 1, so limω dikϕ         ik
                                                                                 ≤ M , thus p = limω (pi ) ∈ limω (X/kϕi k, oi ).
Now fix some 1 ≤ j ≤ n. Consider a geodesic quadrilateral in Xi with vertices (in cyclic order) being
{oi , qi , ϕi (hej )qi , ϕi (hej )oi }. Note that the side between qi and ϕi (hej )qi has length at most 4δ + 2. Moreover,
16                                                  D. GROVES AND M. HULL


this geodesic quadrilateral is 2δ–slim, so there is a point p′i ∈ [oi , qi ] such that di (p′i , ϕi (hej )pi ) ≤ 6δ + 2 (since
ϕi (hej )pi cannot be near [oi , ϕi (hej )oi ] by choice of pi ).
   Now, di (qi , ϕi (hej )qi ) ≤ 4δ + 2 and di (pi , qi ) = di (ϕi (hej )pi , ϕi (hej )qi ), so combining these inequalities we
get:
                                            |di (pi , qi ) − di (p′i , qi )| < 10δ + 4
   Since pi and p′i both belong to [oi , qi ], we get that di (pi , p′i ) ≤ 10δ + 4, and hence di (pi , ϕi (hej )pi ) ≤ 16δ + 6.
Therefore, the point p is fixed by each hj , and thus fixed by H = hh1 , ..., hn i. Finally, note that T is invariant
under the action of H, so since H fixes p it also fixes the unique geodesic from p to T . In particular, the
intersection of this geodesic and T is a point of T which is fixed by H.
   (6)- Suppose that H ∈ LSE(L) and H fixes a non-trivial arc [x, y] in T . Let F be a finite subset of H.
Then hF i ∈ SE(L), so by the proof of (5), ω–almost surely we can find pi ∈ Xi such that p = limω pi ∈
limω (X/kϕi k, oi ) and di (pi , ϕi (e
                                     h)pi ) ≤ 16δ + 6 for all h ∈ F . Hence hF i fixes the point p, and also the unique
arc in limω (X/kϕi k, oi ) from p to [x, y]. At least one of the two arcs [p, x] and [p, y] must be non-degenerate,
suppose it is [p, y] and y = limω (yi ).
    Let ε3 = 16δ + 6 and let R3 = Rε3 and N3 = Nε3 be given by Lemma 2.11. Now as in (1), ω–almost surely
we can choose qi ∈ [pi , yi ] such that for all h ∈ F , di (qi , pi ) ≥ di (pi , ϕi (e   h)pi ) + 2δ, di (qi , pi ) ≥ di (qi , yi ) ≥
di (yi , ϕi (e
             h)yi ) + 2δ and di (pi , qi ) ≥ R3 . For a fixed h ∈ F and lift e     h of h, ϕi (e
                                                                                               h)qi ∈ ϕi (eh)[pi , yi ]. Let qi′ be
the closest point on [pi , yi ] to ϕi (e   h)qi , so di (qi , ϕi (e
                                                          ′
                                                                  h)qi ) ≤ 2δ. Now
                                     di (qi , ϕi (e
                                                  h)qi ) ≤ di (qi , qi′ ) + 2δ ≤ di (qi , pi ) + 2δ
Since di (pi , ϕi (e
                   h)pi ) ≤ 16δ + 6, we can apply Lemma 2.11 to get that |F | ≤ N3 . Finally, since the size of
every finite subset of H is bounded by N3 , we get that |H| ≤ N3 .                                           

4.2. From R–trees to simplicial trees. The Rips machine (see [4, 16, 32]) allows one to upgrade group
actions on R–trees to group actions on (related) simplicial trees.
   The Stability Lemma 4.7 allows us to apply Guirardel’s version of the Rips machine [16]. We begin by
recalling some terminology from [16].
Definition 4.9. [16, Definition 1.2] A graph of actions of R–trees is given by the following data:
       • A group G, and an isometric G–action without inversions on a simplicial tree S (the tree S is called
         the skeleton of the graph of actions);
       • An R–tree Yv (called a vertex tree) assigned to each vertex v of S;
       • An attaching point pe ∈ Yv for each oriented edge e of S with terminal vertex v.
Moreover, we require that this data is G–equivariant: G acts on the disjoint union of the vertex trees so that
Yv 7→ v is G–equivariant, and moreover for every edge e in S and g ∈ G we have pg.e = g.pe .

   To a graph of actions G = (S, (Yv ), (pe )) we can assign an R–tree TG , equipped with an isometric G–
action, see [18]. Briefly, TG is obtained by taking the quotient of the disjoint union of the Yv by identifying
the two attaching points of each edge of S.
Definition 4.10. Suppose that G is a group, and that T is an R–tree equipped with an isometric G–action.
We say that T splits as a graph of actions G if there is a G–equivariant isometry from T to TG .

  The tree TG associated to a graph of actions is covered by the vertex trees in a particularly nice way, as
encoded in the next definition.
Definition 4.11. [16, Definition 1.4] A transverse covering of an R–tree T is a covering of T by a family
of subtrees Y = (Yv )v∈V such that
     (1) Each Yv is a closed subtree of T ;
                        HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                    17


    (2) Each arc of T is covered by finitely many subtrees from Y; and
    (3) For v1 6= v2 ∈ V , |Yv1 ∩ Yv2 | ≤ 1.
Lemma 4.12. [18, Lemma 4.7] Suppose that the group G acts on the R–tree T . If T splits as a graph of
actions G then the image in T of the non-degenerate vertex trees from TG give a transverse covering of T .
   Conversely, if T has a G–invariant transverse covering then there is a graph of actions G whose non-
degenerate vertex trees consist of the (non-degenerate) subtrees of the transverse covering, so that T ≃ TG .

  We are interested in finding graph of actions decompositions of actions of group on R–trees, and in
particular it is important to understand the different types of vertex trees that arise.
Definition 4.13 (see [16]). Suppose that G is a group acting isometrically on an R–tree T , and that Y is a
subtree of T . Let GY be the (set-wise) stabilizer of Y .
   We say that Y is of Seifert type if the action of GY on Y has kernel KY , and the group GY /KY admits
a faithful action on Y which is dual to an arational measured foliation on a closed 2–orbifold with boundary.
   We say that Y is of axial type if Y is a line and the image of GY in Isom(R) is a finitely generated group
with dense orbits in Y .
  We say that Y is simplicial if the action of GY on Y is simplicial.

   For a group G acting on an R–tree T , recall from Definition 4.5 that an arc J of T is called stable if for
every subarc I ⊆ J, StabG (I) = StabG (J). Arcs which are not stable are called unstable.
Definition 4.14. Let G be a group acting on an R–tree T . We say that T satisfies the ascending chain
condition if for any nested sequence of arcs I1 ⊇ I2 ⊇ ... whose intersection is a point the corresponding
sequence of stabilizers StabG (I1 ) ⊆ StabG (I2 ) ⊆ ... is eventually constant.
Theorem 4.15. [16, Main Theorem] Let G be a group acting non-trivially and minimally on an R tree T
by isometries. Assume that:
    (1) T satisfies the ascending chain condition.
    (2) For any unstable arc J,
        (a) StabG (J) is finitely generated.
         (b) StabG (J) is not conjugate to a proper subgroup of itself.
Then either (i) G splits over the stabilizer of an unstable arc or over the stabilizer of an infinite tripod; or
(ii) T has a decomposition into a graph of actions where each vertex action is either simplicial, axial, or of
Seifert type.

   When the R–tree T (equipped with a G–action) admits a graph of actions as in the conclusion of Theorem
4.15, then the set of vertex trees forms a G–invariant transverse covering of T by Lemma 4.12. Starting with
a transverse covering, we next describe how to construct a particularly nice skeleton of the associated the
graph of actions. Our construction is a variation of the one given by Guirardel in the proof of [18, Lemma
4.7], so we first describe Guirardel’s construction and then our modification.
   If T has a transverse covering by a family of subtrees Y, then Guirardel constructs the skeleton S of the
associated graph of actions as the tree with vertices V (S) = V0 (S) ∪ V1 (S), where V1 (S) is the set of subtrees
Y ∈ Y and V0 (S) is the set of points of T which lie in at least 2 distinct subtrees. The edges of S are pairs
of the form (x, Y ) where x ∈ V0 (S), Y ∈ V1 (S), and x ∈ Y [18, Lemma 4.7].
   Under this construction, when Y ∈ Y is a simplicial subtree of T , it gets collapsed to a point when passing
to the skeleton S. Additionally, the stabilizer of the edge e = (x, Y ) corresponds to the stabilizer of a single
point in Y , and we do not have good control over such stabilizers when Y is simplicial. Hence, we modify
the above construction in order to both keep the simplicial trees intact and also collapse edges of the form
(x, Y ) with Y a simplicial tree.
18                                           D. GROVES AND M. HULL


   First let us assume that all simplicial pieces of the transverse covering are ‘maximal’ in the sense that if
Yu and Yv are both simplicial for some u and v and Yu ∩ Yv 6= ∅ then Yu = Yv and u = v. Moreover, let us
assume that simplicial trees Yu are not points.
   We now build the skeleton S associated to a transverse covering Y = (Yv )v∈V . The vertex set V (S) =
V0 (S) ⊔ V1 (S) ⊔ V2 (S), where V0 (S) is the set of points which lie in the intersection of at least 2 distinct
trees in Y, V1 (S) is the set of non-simplicial trees Y ∈ Y and V2 (S) is the set of branch points of simplicial
trees Y ∈ Y. In addition to the “internal” branch points of simplicial trees, here we consider any point
which lies in the intersection of a simplicial tree Y and a non-simplicial tree to be a branch point in Y . The
edge set E(S) = E0 (S) ⊔ E1 (S) ⊔ E2 (S), where E0 (S) consists of edges of the form (x, Y ) where x ∈ V0 (S),
Y ∈ V1 (S) and x ∈ Y , E1 (S) consists of edges in simplicial trees Y ∈ Y, E2 (S) consists of edges of the form
(x, y) where x ∈ V0 (S), y ∈ V2 (S) and x = y.
  The collapsed skeleton S c is obtained from S by collapsing the edges in E2 (S). If a vertex v in S c is the
image of a vertex from V1 (S), there there is an associated non-simplicial subtree Yv of T associated to v. For
any other vertex v of S c , there is an associated point pv ∈ T which is either a branching point in a simplicial
subtree of T or is the intersection of 2 non-simplicial subtrees of T .
Observation 4.16. Suppose that the group G acts on the R–tree T and that T splits as a graph of actions G
with S c the associated collapsed skeleton constructed above. If e = (x, Y ) ∈ E0 (S) then Ge = GY ∩ Stab(x),
those elements of the group GY which fix x. If e ∈ E1 (S) is an edge in a simplicial tree Y ∈ Y with endpoints
x, y, then Ge = StabG ([x, y]).

     The following result is similar to [18, Lemma 4.9].
Lemma 4.17. Suppose that the non-degenerate R–tree T is equipped with a nontrivial minimal action of
the group G, and that (Yv )v∈V is a G–equivariant transverse covering. Let S be the associated skeleton and
S c the collapsed skeleton.
   The G–action on S c is minimal, and S c is a point if and only if the transverse covering consists of a
single non-simplicial tree.

Proof. Suppose that S ′ ⊂ S c is a G–invariant subtree. Associated to each vertex of S ′ is a subtree (possibly
a point) of T . Let T ′ be the union of these subtrees of T ; additionally, if u, v are adjacent vertices in S ′
which correspond to points pu , pv in a simplicial subtree Y ∈ Y, then add the edge [pu , pv ] to T ′ . Note
that T ′ is equal to a union of subtrees which belong to Y and arcs which are contained in elements of Y.
Since S ′ is connected and edges in S c imply either nonempty intersection of subtrees or adjacent vertices in
a simplicial subtree of T , T ′ is also connected and hence is a subtree of T . It is clear that T ′ is G–invariant,
which by minimality of T implies that T ′ = T .
   Suppose that v is a vertex in S c . Then the subtree Y of T associated to v is contained in T ′ = T . If Y is
a non-simplicial tree, then Y ∈ Y and hence Y cannot be covered by other elements of Y by the definition of
a transverse cover, so we must have v ∈ S ′ . If Y is a point in the intersection of two non-simplicial subtrees
of T , then the vertices corresponding to these non-simplicial subtrees both belong to S ′ and are adjacent to
v in S c , hence v ∈ S ′ . If Y is a branch point in a simplicial tree belonging to Y, then Y is the endpoint of
an edge e of this simplicial tree (since we assumed that simplicial subtree in Y are not points). Since e is
contained in T ′ , the vertices of S c corresponding to the endpoints of e must belong to S ′ , hence v ∈ S ′ . The
final assertion about when S c can be a point is clear from the construction.                                    

   Recall that a divergent G–limit group L acts on a R–tree T and the stabilizers of unstable arcs are
uniformly finite by the Stability Lemma 4.7. Clearly such an action satisfies the hypothesis of Theorem 4.15,
so we have the following.
Theorem 4.18. Suppose that G is a finitely generated group and that (ϕi ) is a divergent sequence from
Hom(G, G) with L = G/ kerω (ϕi ). Then the associated action of L on the limiting R–tree T satisfies the
hypotheses of Theorem 4.15.
                         HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                      19


  Consequently, either

    (1) L splits over a uniformly finite subgroup which is the stabilizer of either an unstable arc or of an
        infinite tripod in T ; or
    (2) The L–action on T admits a graph of actions decomposition where each vertex tree is either simplicial,
        of axial type, or of Seifert type.

   In the first case above, the splitting is over a (uniformly) finite edge group, and we are able to ignore this
case in this paper. We now proceed to describe the splitting of L obtained in the second case of this theorem
in more detail, summarizing the above construction.

Proposition 4.19. Let L be a divergent G–limit group, and T the associated limiting R–tree. Suppose that
L does not split over the stabilizer of an unstable arc or over the stabilizer of an infinite tripod in T . Then
the action of L on the limit tree T splits as a graph of actions with collapsed skeleton S c and the following
hold:

    (1) V (S c ) = U0 ⊔ U1 such that for each v ∈ U0 there is an associated point pv ∈ T and for each v ∈ U1
        there is an associated non-simplicial subtree Yv of T .
    (2) If v ∈ U0 , then StabL (v) = StabL (pv ).
    (3) If v ∈ U1 , then the action of StabL (v) = LYv on Yv is either of axial type or of Seifert type.
    (4) If v ∈ U1 and the action of LYv on Yv is of Seifert type, the kernel of the action of LYv on Yv is
        uniformly finite and all infinite subgroups of LYv are either contained in N LSE (L) or they contain a
        cyclic subgroup of uniformly finite index. Moreover, those infinite subgroups that are not in N LSE(L)
        correspond to boundary components of the associated orbifold.
    (5) If v ∈ U1 and the action of LYv on Yv is of axial type, then LYv has a subgroup of index at most 2
        which is (uniformly finite)-by-abelian and contained in N LSE (L).
    (6) Distinct vertices in U1 are not adjacent in S c .
    (7) If e = (u, v) ∈ E(S c ) with u, v ∈ U0 , then StabL (e) = StabL ([pu , pv ]) is (uniformly finite)-by-abelian
        and contained in N LSE(L).
    (8) If e = (u, v) ∈ E(S c ) with u ∈ U0 and v ∈ U1 , then StabL (e) = StabL (pu ) ∩ LYv . Furthermore,
         (a) If the action of LYv is Seifert-type, then StabL (e) is either finite or it has a cyclic subgroup of
              uniformly finite index.
         (b) If the action of LYv is axial-type, then StabL (e) is either uniformly finite or has a subgroup of
              index at most 2 which is (uniformly finite)-by-abelian and contained in N LSE(L).

Finally, if H ≤ L fixes a point in T then H fixes a point in S c . In particular, every finitely generated member
of SE(L) is elliptic with respect to the action of L on S c .


Proof. Let U0 be the image of V0 ∪ V2 in S c and U1 the image of V1 in S c . Properties (1), (2), (3), and (6)
follow from the construction of S c and Theorem 4.18; it is also clear from the construction of S c that if H ≤ L
fixes a point in T it also fixes a point in S c . If the action of LYv on Yv is of Seifert type, then the kernel K
of the action of LYv on Yv fixes a tripod in T and hence is uniformly finite by Lemma 4.7(3). Furthermore,
every infinite subgroup of LYv corresponds either to a boundary component of the underlying orbifold and
hence contain a cyclic subgroup of uniformly finite index, or it contains an infinite cyclic subgroup which
has no fixed point in T , hence this subgroup belongs to N LSE (L) by Lemma 4.7(5). Hence (4) holds.
   (5) follows from Lemma 4.7(2), 4.7(5), and the fact that LYv has a finitely generated subgroups with
no fixed points in T since the image of LYv in Isom(R) is a finitely generated subgroup with dense orbits.
(7) follows from Lemma 4.7(1). (8a) Follows from the fact that points in Yv which are fixed by non-trivial
subgroups of LYv correspond to either boundary components in the corresponding orbifold or to cone points
in the orbifold, that is points with finite stabilizer. Finally, (8b) follows from Lemma 5.2 proved in the next
section.                                                                                                     
20                                              D. GROVES AND M. HULL


                          5. JSJ decompositions and the Shortening Argument

   In the previous section, we showed how a divergent G–limit group L admits a natural action on an R–tree
which in turn produces a splitting of L via the Rips machine. In this section, we prove the existence of a JSJ
decomposition for L (see Theorem 5.20), a graph of groups decompositions which in a certain sense encodes
all possible splittings for L which can arise in this manner. In Subsection 5.4, we provide a collection of
automorphisms of a divergent G–limit group which are then used to make an adaptation of Sela’s shortening
argument to our setting.

5.1. Virtually abelian subgroups. For the rest of this section, fix a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic
family G and a G–limit group L with a defining sequence (ϕi ) from Hom(G, G) for some finitely generated
group G. As in Definition 4.3, we let SE(L) and LSE(L) denote the set of stably elliptic and locally
stably elliptic subgroups of L, with respect to the defining sequence (ϕi ), and let N LSE (L) denote the set of
subgroups which are not locally stably elliptic (with respect to (ϕi )). We also use K throughout this section
as the constant from Lemma 2.10 for the family G. As before, uniformly finite means bounded by a constant
which depends only on the hyperbolicity and acylindricity constants for the family G.
      The following proof is essentially the same as [31, Lemma 1.21].
Lemma 5.1. Let H ≤ L be a subgroup so that H ∈ N LSE (L). Then the following are equivalent:
       (1) H is virtually finite-by-abelian.
       (2) ω–almost surely there exists loxodromic elements gi ∈ Γi such that for every finitely generated sub-
           group J ≤ H ϕi (Je) ⊆ EΓi (gi ).
       (3) H has a (uniformly finite)-by-abelian subgroup H + of index at most 2 so that [H + : Z(H + )] is
           uniformly finite.
       (4) H is virtually abelian.
       (5) All finitely generated subgroups of H are virtually abelian.

Proof. We begin by establishing some notation that is used throughout the proof. Let H = {h1 , ...}, and let
e
hi ∈ ϕ−1                                                                         e
      ∞ (hi ). Let H0 be a finitely generated subgroup of H such that ϕi (H0 ) is ω–almost surely not elliptic
       e                                                      e
where H0 be a finitely generated subgroup of G such that ϕ∞ (H0 ) = H0 . Thus ω–almost surely we can choose
a loxodromic element gi ∈ Γi with gi ∈ ϕi (He 0 ). Let Hk = hH0 , h1 , ..., hk i and let H      e0, e
                                                                                         e k = hH   h1 , ..., e
                                                                                                              hk i. Let
e = he
H                                    e = H.
      h1 , ...i. We clearly have ϕ∞ (H)
   Suppose H is virtually finite-by-abelian. Then each Hk is virtually finite-by-abelian, and since Hk is
also finitely generated we get that Hk is finitely presented. It follows that ω–almost surely, ϕi (H   e k ) is a
                                                                             f
quotient of Hk and hence virtually finite-by-abelian, which implies that ϕi (Hk ) ⊆ EΓi (gi ). This shows that
(1) =⇒ (2).
   Now suppose that ω–almost surely ϕi (H      fk ) ⊆ EΓi (gi ). Note that there are finitely many isomorphism
types of elementary groups with all finite subgroups of size at most K. Thus, ω–almost surely there is a
fixed elementary group E and homomorphisms ϕ′i : H      fk → E such that Hk = H     fk / kerω (ϕ′ ). Now E has a
                                                                                                i
            +                                                    e +     ′ −1   +
subgroup E of index at most 2 which is finite-by-Z. Let Hk,i = (ϕi ) (E ). This is a subgroup of index
at most 2 in He k , and since H
                              e k has only finitely many subgroups of index at most 2 there is a fixed subgroup
 e
Hk which occurs ω–almost surely. Let Hk+ = ϕ∞ (H
   +                                                   e + ), clearly [Hk : H + ] ≤ 2. Since for each i we have
                                                         k                  S∞k
He ⊆H
   +    e +                        +
              , it follows that H ≤ H     +
                                              . Hence we can define H + =         H + , which is a subgroup of H
     k,i    k+1,i                  k      k+1                                    k=1   k
of index at most 2. The size of the commutator subgroup of ϕ′i (H  e + ) is uniformly finite, so the commutator
                                                                     k
                    +
subgroup of each Hk is uniformly finite and hence the commutator subgroup of H + is uniformly finite. Thus
H + is (uniformly finite)-by-abelian.
   Let M = [E + : Z(E + )] and let Z  ek,i = (ϕ′ )−1 (Z(E + )) ∩ H
                                                                 e + , a subgroup of H + of index at most M .
                                                    i                  k                     k
Again, since Hk+ is finitely generated there are only finitely many such subgroups, so ω–almost surely this
                        HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                      21


                                             ek . As ϕ′ (Zek ) is central ω–almost surely, Zk := ϕ∞ (Z
is equal to a fixed subgroup which we denote Z                                                       ek ) is a
                                                      i
central subgroup of Hk of index at most M . Hence [Hk+ : Z(Hk+ )] ≤ M .
                       +


   After passing to a subsequence of k we can assume that [Hk+ : Z(Hk+ )] = M0 . for some fixed M0 ≤ M .
Hk+ ≤ Hk+1
         +                            +
             , so the the index of Z(Hk+1 ) ∩ Hk+ in Hk+ is at most M0 . Also Z(Hk+1
                                                                                 +
                                                                                     ) ∩ Hk+ ≤ Z(Hk+ ), and
   +         +                  +      +         +              +        +
[Hk : Z(Hk )] = M0 , so Z(Hk+1 ) ∩ Hk = Z(Hk ). Thus Z(Hk ) ≤ Z(Hk+1 ), so we can define the subgroup
     S∞
Z = k=1 Zk . Since Z is a central subgroup of H + of index M0 ≤ M , we have [H + : Z(H + )] ≤ M . It is
easy to see that one can bound M in terms of K, so we have shown that (2) =⇒ (3).
   Since (3) =⇒ (1) is trivial, we have proved that (1), (2) and (3) are equivalent. Also the implications
(3) =⇒ (4) =⇒ (5) are obvious. Finally, to conclude we note that the same proof which shows that
(1) =⇒ (2) can be applied to show that (5) =⇒ (2).                                                      

Lemma 5.2. Suppose F ≤ H are virtually abelian subgroups of L such that F ∈ LSE(L) and H ∈ N LSE(L).
Then |F | ≤ K.

Proof. Let F0 be a finitely generated subgroup of F . Then by Lemma 5.1, there exists gi ∈ Γi such that
    f0 ) ⊆ EΓi (gi ) ω–almost surely. Since F0 is stably elliptic, ϕi (F
ϕi (F                                                                  f0 ) is elliptic ω–almost surely, so by Lemma
                            f
2.10 ω–almost surely |ϕi (F0 )| ≤ K. Hence |F0 | ≤ K. Since every finitely generated subgroup of F has size
at most K, |F | ≤ K.                                                                                               

Lemma 5.3. Suppose H ∈ N LSE (L) and H is virtually abelian. Then there exists e   e such that
                                                                               h ∈ H
                    e
ω–almost surely ϕi (h) is loxodromic.

Proof. There is a uniform bound on the order of finite subgroups of H. Since H is virtually abelian, this
means that H must contain an element of infinite order. Let h be such an element. Then ϕi (eh) ∈ EΓi (gi )
has infinite order and hence is loxodromic ω–almost surely.                                            

   Since subgroups of acylindrically hyperbolic groups can be arbitrary, we can not make any claims about the
local algebraic structure of limit groups over acylindrically hyperbolic groups. This is an important technical
difference from the hyperbolic case, where there is rather strict control on finite subgroups, virtually abelian
subgroups, and elements of infinite order. In our situation many of these properties still go through if we
restrict to subgroups of our limit group which “see” the hyperbolicity in an essential way. For that we
introduce the following definition, which characterizes those subgroups which never “see” the hyperbolicity
of G.
Definition 5.4. Let R be a G–limit group. We say a subgroup H ≤ R is absolutely elliptic if for all finitely
generated groups G0 , and all defining sequences (ψi ) from Hom(G0 , G) such that R = G0 / kerω (ψi ), H is
locally stably elliptic with respect to the sequence (ψi ).
Lemma 5.5. Suppose A and B are virtually abelian subgroups of L which are not absolutely elliptic.
    (1) If A ∩ B is not absolutely elliptic, then hA, Bi is virtually abelian.
    (2) If A ∩ B is absolutely elliptic, then |A ∩ B| ≤ K.

Proof. Suppose A ∩ B is not absolutely elliptic. Let (ψi ) be a defining sequence of homomorphisms for L
such that A ∩ B ∈ N LSE(L) (with respect to this sequence). Clearly this implies that A and B are also
contained in N LSE(L) with respect to ψi . Choose H ≤ A∩B such that H is finitely generated and there is a
loxodromic element gi so that ω–almost surely gi ∈ ψi (H).e Then by Lemma 5.1, for every finitely generated
A0 ≤ A and B0 ≤ B, ϕi (A    f0 ∪ B
                                 f0 ) ⊆ EΓi (gi ) and hence ψi (hA f0 , B
                                                                        f0 i) ⊆ EΓi (gi ) ω–almost surely. Since
every finitely generated subgroup of hA, Bi is contained in a subgroup of the form hA0 , B0 i with A0 ≤ A and
B0 ≤ B both finitely generated, we get that for all finitely generated subgroups J ≤ hA, Bi, ψi (Je) ≤ EΓi (gi ).
Hence hA, Bi is virtually abelian by Lemma 5.1.
22                                           D. GROVES AND M. HULL


   Now suppose A ∩ B is absolutely elliptic and A ∈ N LSE (L) with respect to a defining sequence (ψi ).
Since A ∩ B is absolutely elliptic, A ∩ B ∈ LSE(L) with respect to ψi . Hence |A ∩ B| ≤ K by Lemma 5.2. 
Lemma 5.6. Let H ≤ L be a virtually abelian subgroup which is not absolutely elliptic. Let
                                 MH = h{a ∈ L | ha, Hi is virtually abelian }i .
Then MH is the unique, maximal, virtually abelian subgroup of L containing H.

Proof. If a and b belong to MH , then H ⊆ ha, Hi ∩ hb, Hi, and hence ha, b, Hi is virtually abelian by Lemma
5.5. By induction it follows that all finitely generated subgroups of MH are virtually abelian, which implies
that MH is virtually abelian by Lemma 5.1. The maximality and uniqueness are now clear.                    
Lemma 5.7. If M is a maximal virtually abelian subgroup which is not absolutely elliptic and g −1 M g ∩ M
is infinite, then g ∈ M .

Proof. By Lemma 5.5, since g −1 M g ∩ M is infinite it must be not absolutely elliptic, hence there exist ψi ∈
Hom(G, G) defining L and h ∈ g −1 M g ∩ M such that ψi (e  h) is loxodromic ω–almost surely. Let M0 ≤ M be a
                                                        −1
finitely generated subgroup which contains h. Since g M0 g is virtually abelian, ψi (e         f0 ge) ⊆ EΓi (ψi (e
                                                                                          g −1 M                 h)),
                                          −1 e
and since h ∈ M0 , it follows that ψi (e g he  g) ∈ EΓi (ψi (e             g ) ∈ EΓi (ψi (e
                                                             h)), thus ψi (e              h)) ω–almost surely by
Lemma 2.7. Since also ψi (M  f0 ) ⊆ EΓi (ψi (e
                                             hi )) ω–almost surely, we get that hg, M0 i is virtually abelian. It
follows that every finitely generated subgroup of hg, M i is virtually abelian, so hg, M i is virtually abelian by
Lemma 5.1. Therefore g ∈ M by maximality.
                                                                                                                   
Standing Assumption 5.8. Given G, there exists a number C so that C ≥ K for K the constant from
Lemma 2.10 so that everything which is shown to be “uniformly finite” in Lemma 4.7, Theorem 4.18, Propo-
sition 4.19 and Lemma 5.1 is bounded by C. We fix this constant C for the remainder of the section.

5.2. JSJ-decompositions. We are now ready to start showing that L admits a JSJ decomposition. We
use the language of Guirardel–Levitt [17] for JSJ decompositions.
Definition 5.9. Given a group G, let A and H be two families of subgroups of G such that A is closed under
conjugation and taking subgroups. An (A, H)–tree is a simplicial tree T together with an action of G on T
such that each edge stabilizer belongs to A and each H ∈ H fixes a point in T . Similarly, a graph of groups
decomposition of G is called an (A, H)–splitting if the corresponding Bass–Serre tree is an (A, H)–tree. This
is also referred to as a splitting over A relative to H.
   An (A, H)–tree T is called universally elliptic if the edge stabilizers of T are elliptic in every other (A, H)–
tree. Also, given trees T and T ′ , we say T dominates T ′ if every vertex stabilizer of T is elliptic with respect
to T ′ .
Definition 5.10. A graph of groups decomposition A of G is called a (A, H)–JSJ decomposition of L if the
corresponding Bass–Serre tree T is an (A, H)–tree which is universally elliptic and which dominates every
other universally elliptic (A, H)–tree.

     Generally speaking, an (A, H)–JSJ decomposition is not unique, see [17].
   A subgroup H ≤ G is called rigid in (A, H)–trees if this subgroup is elliptic in every (A, H)–tree. Sub-
groups which are not rigid are called flexible (in (A, H)–trees). When A and H are understood we simply say
the subgroup is rigid or flexible. Typically, a description of a JSJ decomposition also includes a description
of the flexible vertex groups.
Definition 5.11. A vertex group H = Gv of an (A, H)–graph of groups decomposition of a group G is called
a QH-subgroup if there is a normal subgroup N ≤ H (called the fiber of H) such that H/N is isomorphic to
the fundamental group of a hyperbolic 2–orbifold and the image of any incident edge group in H/N is finite
or conjugate to the fundamental group of a boundary component of the orbifold.
                       HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                   23


   A QH(A,H) –subgroup is a QH–subgroup so that for every essential simple closed curve γ on the underlying
orbifold, the corresponding subgroup Qγ belongs to A, and if furthermore the intersection of H and any
element of H has image in H/N that is finite or conjugate to the fundamental group of a boundary component
of the orbifold.

  In the case where L is a divergent G–limit group, we consider the following families of subgroups.
Definition 5.12. Let Aufin denote the collection of all finite subgroups of L of order at most 2C and let A∞
denote the collection of all virtually abelian subgroups which are not absolutely elliptic. Let A = Aufin ∪ A∞ .
Let H denote the collection of all finitely generated absolutely elliptic subgroups of L.

   In this section we are mostly concerned with the case where L does not split over Aufin relative to H. As
is explained in Section 6, the general case can be reduced to this case using a Linnell decomposition, which
is an (Aufin , H)–JSJ decomposition.
   In all situations we consider, the fiber N of a QH–subgroup is finite and so Qγ is virtually cyclic. Hence
in case L is a G–limit group, in the above definition of QH(A,H) we are requiring curves of the underlying
orbifold to correspond to subgroups which are not absolutely elliptic.
   The collection A is clearly closed under conjugation, and A is closed under taking subgroups by Lemma
5.2. Our next goal is to show that a divergent G–limit group admits a non-trivial (A, H)–JSJ decomposition.
Since L is not (necessarily) finitely presented, we need Weidmann’s (k, C)–acylindrical accessibility [41] (a
generalization of Sela’s acylindrical accessibility [35]) to show that these JSJ decompositions exists. In order
to do this, we need to show that (A, H)–splittings can be modified to make them (2, C)–acylindrical. This
can be done with the methods of [31]; instead we use the Guirardel–Levitt tree of cylinders construction.
Definition 5.13. A tree T is (k, C)–acylindrical if the point-wise stabilizer of every path of length ≥ k + 1
has order ≤ C.

   For A, B ∈ A∞ , let A ∼ B if hA, Bi is virtually abelian. The fact that this is an equivalence relation
follows easily from Lemma 5.5. Similarly, it is easy to check that this equivalence relation is admissible in
the sense of [17, Definition 7.1]. Now, L acts on A∞ / ∼ by conjugation, and the stabilizer of an equivalence
class [A] is equal to the maximal virtually abelian subgroup MA containing A by Lemma 5.7. In particular,
each such stabilizer is small (contains no nonabelian free subgroup) and belongs to A∞ . Thus we can build
the tree of cylinders Tc for any (A∞ , H) tree T . The properties of this construction are summarized in the
following result, which is an immediate consequence of [17, Proposition 7.12]. Note that in our setting, the
tree of cylinders and the collapsed tree of cylinders are the same, see [17, Lemma 7.3].
Proposition 5.14. [17, Proposition 7.12] For any (A∞ , H)–tree T , there exists a (A∞ , H) tree Tc called the
tree of cylinders such that
   (1) Tc is (2, C)–acylindrical.
   (2) T dominates Tc and any group which is elliptic in Tc but not in T is virtually abelian and not virtually
       cyclic.

  A group is called C–virtually cyclic if it maps onto either Z or D∞ with kernel of order at most C.
Theorem 5.15. [17, First part of Theorem 8.7] Given A and H, suppose there exist numbers C and k such
that
   (1) A ∪ H contains all C–virtually cyclic subgroups.
   (2) A contains all subgroups of order ≤ 2C.
   (3) Every (A, H)–tree T , dominates some (k, C)–acylindrical (A, H) tree T ∗ such that every subgroup
       which is elliptic in T ∗ but not in T is virtually abelian.
  Then the JSJ deformation space of G over A relative to H exists.
24                                         D. GROVES AND M. HULL


Remark 5.16. In [17], Theorem 5.15 is proved with the hypothesis that A contains all C–virtually cyclic
groups. However, in the proof this condition is only applied to C–virtually cyclic groups which act hyperboli-
cally on some (A, H)–tree. Such a group cannot belong to H, and so they must belong to A. Hence the proof
given in [17] works as written to prove Theorem 5.15.

   The second part of [17, Theorem 8.7] is a description of the flexible vertex groups. This part is more
complicated in our setting and the proof from [17] does use the assumption that A contains all C–virtually
cyclic groups in an essential way. We deal with the flexible vertex groups in the JSJ decomposition in Section
5.3 below.

5.3. Flexible vertex groups. For the rest of this section, we assume that L admits no splitting over
Aufin relative to H. Combining Proposition 5.14 and Theorem 5.15, we find that L admits a (A, H)–JSJ
decomposition. Our next goal is to describe the flexible vertices of this JSJ decomposition. If A contained
all C–virtually cyclic groups, then we could apply [17, Theorem 8.7] directly to get that all flexible vertices
are either virtually abelian or QH with finite fiber. However, this need not be the case in our situation.
Nevertheless, we can get a description of the flexible vertices by applying essentially the same proof which
appears in [17]. We start by briefly sketching the proof that flexible vertices are QH in the proof of [17,
Theorem 8.7], then we explain how this proof can be modified in our situation.
   Fix a flexible vertex v of the JSJ decomposition. Since we can apply the tree of cylinders construction
to make our splittings (2, C)–acylindrical, it suffices to assume that all splittings of Lv that we consider
are already (2, C)–acylindrical. Let IncHv denote the subgroups of Lv which are conjugate into stabilizers of
edges adjacent to v or are contained in H. Then any splitting of Lv over A relative to IncH     v extends to a
(A, H)–splitting of L. Since v is a vertex of the JSJ decomposition, we may assume as in [17, §6.2] that Lv
is totally flexible, which means that Lv admits no splitting over A relative to IncH   v with edge groups that
are universally elliptic. This implies (by acylindricity) that every (A, IncH
                                                                            v )–splitting of Lv has C–virtually
cyclic subgroups.
   By Weidmann’s acylindrical accessibility [41, Theorem 1], Lv has a “maximal” (2, C)–acylindrical tree
U , that is a tree with the maximal number of orbits of edges among all (2, C)–acylindrical splittings of Lv .
By [17, Proposition 6.28], Lv has another tree V which is fully hyperbolic with respect to U . Let R be the
regular neighborhood of U and V , described in [17, Proposition 6.25].
   The tree R is bipartite with vertices belonging to S = 6 ∅ and V, with V possibly empty. Vertices in
S have stabilizers which are QH while vertices in V have stabilizers which are elliptic in both U and V .
Furthermore, every subgroup in IncH  v fixes a point in R, and edge stabilizers in R are C–virtually cyclic.
In the setting of [17], this means that R is a (minimal) (A, IncH
                                                                v )–tree. If R contains an edge, then this
produces a contradiction with the maximality of U . Hence R is consists of a single vertex which belongs to
S, and so Lv itself is QH.
   In our setting, we obtain a contradiction if at least one of the edge stabilizers of R belongs to A. It
follows that all edge stabilizers of R are C–virtually cyclic and absolutely elliptic. Similarly, each vertex in
V must have a stabilizer which does not split over A relative to IncH  v , otherwise we could refine R at this
vertex and obtain a contradiction with the maximality of U as above. Hence these vertex groups are rigid
in (A, H)–trees.
    For each vertex v ∈ S and each essential simple closed geodesic γ on the underlying orbifold, the corre-
sponding subgroup Qγ ≤ Lv belongs to A. This follows from maximality of U . Indeed, U is obtained by
refining R at each v ∈ S and then collapsing all original edges of R. This refinement must correspond to a
filling collection of geodesics on each orbifold by maximality of U , and hence the subgroup corresponding to
each other geodesic acts hyperbolically on U and hence does not belong to H.
     Thus we obtain the following.
Lemma 5.17. Let v be a flexible vertex in the (A, H)–JSJ decomposition of L and suppose that Lv is not
virtually abelian. Then either Lv is QH(A,H) with finite fiber or Lv admits a splitting over C–virtually cyclic
                        HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                      25


absolutely elliptic subgroups relative to IncH
                                             v such that every vertex group in this splitting is either (i) rigid
in (A, H)–trees; or (ii) QH(A,H) with finite fiber.
Corollary 5.18. Let v be a flexible vertex in the (A, H)–JSJ decomposition of L and suppose that Lv
is not virtually abelian. Suppose that Λ is a nontrivial one-edge (A, H)–splitting of Lv relative to IncH
                                                                                                        v .
Then Λ can be obtained from the splitting of Lv in Lemma 5.17 from cutting the surface corresponding to a
QH(A,H) -vertex along a simple closed curve and then collapsing all other edges.

   Now that we have a description of the flexible vertices, we can apply results of [17] to get that the tree of
cylinders of the (A, H)–JSJ tree is compatible with every (A, H)–tree.
Definition 5.19. Let G be a group. Two G–trees T1 and T2 are compatible if they have a common refine-
ment: if there exists a tree T̂ with collapse maps T̂ → Ti .

   Let Anvc denote the groups which belong to A that are not virtually cyclic. The proof of the following is
essentially contained in [17].
Theorem 5.20. Let L be a G–limit group which does not split over Aufin relative to H. Let Ta be a (A, H)
JSJ-tree, and let (Ta )c be the corresponding tree of cylinders. Then (Ta )c is an (A, H ∪ Anvc )–JSJ tree which
is compatible with every (A, H)–tree.

Proof. Let T be some (A, H)–tree. Then by [17, Lemma 2.8.(1)] Ta has a refinement S which dominates T .
By [17, Lemma 7.14], the tree of cylinders Sc and T have a common refinement R. By [17, Lemma 7.15], Sc
is a refinement of (Ta )c , hence R is a common refinement of (Ta )c and T .
   The proof of [17, Lemma 7.15] uses the fact that the flexible vertices of (Ta )c are either small in (A, H) trees
or are QH with finite fiber. However, in our situation the “flexible” part of flexible vertices are QH(A,H) by
Corollary 5.18, so the same proof works with only the obvious changes.                                            
Definition 5.21. Suppose that L is a G–limit group which does not split over Aufin relative to H. The JSJ-
tree of L is the tree (Ta )c described in Theorem 5.20 above. The graph of groups decomposition associated
to the JSJ-tree is denoted AJSJ and referred to as the JSJ-decomposition of L. We also denote by TM the
tree obtained from (Ta )c by taking the refinement of each non-(virtually abelian) flexible vertex group given
by Lemma 5.17. We call TM the modular tree, and the associated graph of groups decomposition is denoted
by AM and referred to as the modular splitting of L.

   Note that the vertex groups of the modular splitting may be characterized as QH(A,H) , virtually abelian
and rigid in the usual way. Also note, however, that some rigid vertex groups of AM may in fact be subgroups
of flexible vertex groups of AJSJ . Additionally, it follows from the construction that every subgroup in A is
either virtually cyclic or is elliptic with respect to the modular tree.

5.4. Modular automorphisms. In this section, we introduce the automorphisms that are used in the
shortening argument below and in Section 6, which are called modular automorphisms. We prove that these
automorphisms can all be “seen” in the modular splitting defined in Definition 5.21 above. This property
justifies the use of the word “modular” for this splitting. We start by describing modular automorphisms of
splittings.
   We mostly follow the definitions and notation from [31, Section 3] here, since we reference their proof of
the shortening argument.
   In this subsection, we mostly consider graphs of groups instead of actions on trees. When we apply
terminology from the previous section to a graph of groups we mean that the Bass–Serre tree dual to this
graph of groups has the given property.
  Suppose G = A ∗C B or G = A∗C and c ∈ ZG (C). A Dehn twist by c is an automorphism of G which fixes
A and conjugates each element of B by c in the amalgamated product case, or an automorphism which fixes
26                                             D. GROVES AND M. HULL


A and sends the stable letter t to tc in the HNN–extension case. When A is a graph of groups decomposition
and e is an edge of A, then a Dehn twist over e is a Dehn twist in the one edge splitting corresponding to
collapsing all edges of A other then e.
  Let Gv be a vertex group of a graph of groups decomposition of a group G. Then any automorphism of
Gv which fixes the adjacent edge group up to conjugacy can be extended to an automorphism of G (see [31,
Definition 3.13]). We call such an extension the natural extension of the automorphism.
  Let L be a G–limit group. Recall by Lemma 5.1 that a virtually abelian subgroup H of L which is not
absolutely elliptic contains a unique, maximal subgroup H + of index at most 2 such that H + is finite-by-
abelian.
    Suppose A is a splitting of L and Lv is a vertex group of A which is virtually abelian and not absolutely
elliptic. Let E(Lv ) denote the subgroup of Lv generated all edge groups adjacent to v, and let E(L+               v) =
E(Lv ) ∩ L+v . Let  Hom  E (L +
                              v , Z) =  {ϕ  ∈  Hom(L   +
                                                       v , Z) | ϕ(g) = 0  ∀ g ∈ E(L +
                                                                                    v )}. Let Pv
                                                                                                +
                                                                                                  = {g ∈  L +
                                                                                                            v  | ϕ(g)  =
0 ∀ ϕ ∈ HomE (L+  v , Z)}. Then    L +
                                     v /Pv
                                          +
                                            is a finitely  generated free abelian group.  Furthermore, if L v is finitely
generated, then Pv+ is the minimal direct factor of L+                                +
                                                               v which contains E(Lv ) and the torsion subgroup of
L+v.

Definition 5.22. [31, Definition 3.15] Let L be a G–limit group and let A be a virtually abelian splitting
of L. The modular automorphism group of L relative to A, denoted ModA (L), is the subgroup of Aut(L)
generated by the following types of automorphisms:
     (1) Inner automorphisms.
     (2) Dehn twists over finite-by-abelian, non-(absolutely elliptic) edge groups Le of A by an element c ∈
         Z(ML+e ).
     (3) Natural extensions of automorphisms of non-(absolutely elliptic) maximal virtually abelian vertex
         groups Lv of A which fix Pv+ and which restrict to conjugation on each subgroup U ≤ Av with
         U + = Pv+ .
     (4) Natural extensions of automorphisms of QH(A,H) -vertex groups of A induced by homeomorphisms of
         the underlying orbifold which fix the boundary.

   For the remainder of the section, fix a divergent G–limit group L which does not split over Aufin relative
to H, and let AJSJ and AM be the graph of groups decompositions of L as in Definition 5.21. By Theorem
5.20, AJSJ is compatible with every (A, H)–decomposition of L.
Theorem 5.23. For any (A, H)–spitting A of L, ModA (L) ≤ ModAM (L). Moreover, the same is true if A
is any splitting of L obtained from a limiting action on R–trees as in Proposition 4.19.

  The proof of Theorem 5.23 is split into a number of smaller results, depending on the type of modular
automorphism. However, we first make the following observation.
Lemma 5.24. ModAJSJ (L) ≤ ModAM (L).

Proof. This follows from the fact that the collapse map from AM to AJSJ only collapses absolutely elliptic
edges of AM into the flexible vertices of AJSJ which are not virtually abelian or QH(A,H) -vertices of AJSJ . 

   In general the inclusion in the above lemma may be strict, as the automorphisms arising from the
QH(A,H) vertices of AM which arise as in Corollary 5.18 may not be modular automorphisms of AJSJ , since
these can lie in flexible vertices of AJSJ which are not QH(A,H) .
Lemma 5.25. Suppose α is a Dehn twist corresponding to a one edge (A, H)–splitting of L. Then α ∈
ModAM (L).

Proof. Let B denote the one edge splitting corresponding to α. By Theorem 5.20, there is a refinement A′
of AJSJ and a collapse map A′ → B. Clearly α ∈ ModA′ (L). If we choose A′ to be the minimal common
                       HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                   27


refinement of AJSJ and B then either A′ = AJSJ or else the collapse map from A′ to AJSJ collapses a single
edge. In the first case, we have already observed that α ∈ ModAJSJ (L) ≤ ModAM (L).
   It remains to consider the case where the collapse map from A′ to AJSJ collapses a single edge, which is
necessarily the edge along which α twists. In this case, the edge group Le is a subgroup of a flexible vertex
group Lv of AJSJ , so Lv is either virtually abelian or else as described in Lemma 5.17. In the first case α
is a modular automorphism for AJSJ of type (3) and so α ∈ ModAJSJ (L) ≤ ModAM (L). In the second case,
Corollary 5.18 implies that the refinement A′ corresponds to a splitting of a QH(A,H) -vertex of AM , hence
the corresponding Dehn twist α is an automorphism of type (4) in ModAM (L).                                

Lemma 5.26. Let A be an (A, H)–splitting of L and let α ∈ ModA (L) be a modular automorphism of type
(3). Then α ∈ ModAJSJ (L).

Proof. Let Lv be the vertex group of A corresponding to α. First, since we are assuming that L does not
split over Aufin , so if Lv is virtually cyclic then the edge groups adjacent to v are infinite and hence finite
index in Lv . It follows that Pv+ is a subgroup of index at most 2 in Lv , so α must act as conjugation on
Lv by an element of the centralizer of Pv+ , which naturally extends to a Dehn twist of L, which belongs to
ModAJSJ by (the proof of) Lemma 5.25.
  Now suppose Lv is not virtually cyclic. Since Lv is a maximal virtually abelian subgroup of L, there is
some vertex u of AJSJ such that Lv = Lu . Hence it suffices to show that Pu+ ⊆ Pv+ .
  Since AJSJ is compatible with every (A, H)–splitting of L, there is a refinement A′ of AJSJ and a collapse
map A′ → A. We assume that A′ is the minimal such refinement. Let u′ be a vertex of A′ which maps to v.
   First consider the collapse map A′ → A. Suppose that there is an edge e of A′ connecting some vertex
w to u′ such that e is collapsed under this map. Then the vertex group obtained from Lu′ by collapsing
e is virtually abelian since it is contained in Lv , this means that Lw = Le . However, it follows from the
construction of the tree of cylinders that edges connecting virtually abelian vertex groups do not occur in
AJSJ , so e is also collapsed under the map A′ → AJSJ . But then the splitting obtained from A′ by collapsing
e is also a refinement of both A and AJSJ , which contradicts the minimality of the refinement A′ . Hence
we can conclude that there are no edges adjacent to u′ which are collapsed under the map A′ → A, thus
Pu+′ = Pv+ .
   Now consider the collapse map A′ → AJSJ . Clearly u′ has to map to u since Lu′ = Lv = Lu . Suppose
that is there is an edge e connecting u′ and some vertex w such that e gets collapsed under the map from
A′ to AJSJ . As before, this means that we must have Lw = Le ≤ Lu′ . After collapsing the edge e, the new
edge groups which become attached to the vertex u′ correspond to edges adjacent to w other then e. So
the corresponding edge groups are contained in Lw = Le , which means that the peripheral structure of Lu′
could only decrease under such a collapse. Furthermore, collapsing edges of A′ which are not adjacent to u′
has no effect on the peripheral structure of Lu′ . Therefore, Pu+ ⊆ Pu+′ = Pv+ .
                                                                                                              

Lemma 5.27. Let A be a virtually abelian splitting of L. Then any α ∈ ModA (L) of type (4) belongs to
ModAM (L).

Proof. This follows quickly from the definition of QH(A,H) -subgroups, Lemma 5.25 and the fact that the
mapping class group is generated by Dehn twists.                                                     

  We have now proved the first assertion of Theorem 5.23.
   The second assertion of Theorem 5.23, where A is a splitting arising from a limiting action on an R–tree
is now straightforward, since automorphisms of type (2) and (3) are associated to (A, H)–splittings and
Lemma 5.27 was proved for any virtually abelian splitting.
  In light of Theorem 5.23, when L is a divergent G–limit group we define Mod(L) := ModAM (L).
28                                         D. GROVES AND M. HULL


5.5. The Shortening Argument.
Definition 5.28. Let L be a divergent G–limit group. Then ϕ ∈ Hom(L, G) is called short if for all
α ∈ Mod(L), kϕk ≤ kϕ ◦ αk.
Theorem 5.29. Suppose G is a finitely generated group which does not split over any finite subgroup of
order at most 2C. Let ϕi : G → Γi be such that Γi ∈ G, kerω (ϕi ) = {1}, and limω kϕi k = ∞. Then ω–almost
surely ϕi is not short.

   The proof of this theorem is essentially the same as the proof which appears in [31, Proposition 4.6]. The
details of the proof are quite technical but they are carefully worked out in [31, Section 4.2], so we only give
a brief sketch of how the proof works and refer to [31] for the details.

Sketch proof. Suppose ϕi : G → Γi such that Γi ∈ G, kerω (ϕi ) = {1}, and limω kϕi k = ∞. Note that
this means that G itself is a divergent G–limit group since G = G/ kerω (ϕi ). In particular, Mod(G) is
well-defined. Throughout the proof, we denote XΓi by Xi . Let T be the limiting R–tree associated to the
sequence (ϕi ) as in Theorem 4.4. Recall that T is a minimal subtree of limω (Xi /kϕi k, oi ), where oi ∈ Xi
such that max di (oi , ϕi (s)oi ) ≤ kϕi k + 1i . Let o = limω (oi ).
           s∈S
   We let A be the splitting of G associated to the action of G on T described in Proposition 4.19. Then the
modular automorphism we find which shorten the actions of G are going to be elements of ModA (G) which
are hence contained in Mod(G) by Theorem 5.23.
   Let S be a finite generating set of G. Then for some g ∈ S, [o, go] is a non-trivial arc in T . By Theorem
4.18 and Lemma 4.12, T has a transverse covering by pieces of either Seifert, axial, or simplicial type. Then
the interval [o, go] must have non-degenerate intersection with at least one piece Y of the transverse covering,
and Y is either Seifert, axial, or simplicial type. Each case is considered separately.
   Suppose Y is either a Seifert or an axial piece in the transverse cover of the tree T . Then there is a
modular automorphism α such that for any h ∈ S, if [o, ho] intersects Y in a non-degenerate segment then
d(o, α(h)o) < d(o, ho), and otherwise d(o, α(h)o) = d(o, ho). This allows us to shorten the action of g on the
limit tree T without affecting the other generators in the cases where [o, go] intersects a Seifert or an axial
piece. Since the actions of ϕi (G) on Xi are converging to the action on the limit tree, α ω–almost surely also
shortens the action of g on the spaces Xi . If Y is an axial piece, α is an automorphism of type (3) and if Y
is an Seifert piece, then α is an automorphism of type (4). Finding the automorphism in the axial case is
described in [31, Section 4.2.1], and finding the automorphism in the Seifert case is described in [31, Section
4.2.2].
    Suppose now that Y is a simplicial piece. In this case, we do not shorten the action of g on the limit tree
T , but instead we directly shorten the action of g on Xi ω–almost surely. That is, given an edge e in Y , for
an ω–large set of i we can find a modular automorphism of type (1), i.e. a Dehn twist αi over the edge e
such that αi shortens the action of each generator h ∈ S on Xi for which e ⊆ [o, ho] and does not affect the
actions of the other generators. Finding the Dehn twist in the simplicial case is in [31, Section 4.2.3].
   Now, for each generator g ∈ S either go = o or there is an ω–large set of i such that there is a modular
automorphism αi which shortens the action of g on Xi and which either shortens or does not affect the
actions of the other generators. Since S is finite, we can take βi to be the product of one such modular
automorphism for each generator, and hence ω–almost surely kϕi ◦ βi k < kϕi k.
    Observe that in [31] the definition of kϕk is slightly different.            We defined kϕi k to be
inf x∈Xi maxs∈S di (x, ϕi (s)x), while in [31] they replace the maximum over the generators with a sum over
the generators. The only difference this makes to the proof is that they can use an automorphism which
shortens a single generator, while we take a product of one shortening automorphism for each generator
which does not fix the basepoint .
  It is also worth noting that we are only assuming that L doesn’t split over Aufin relative to H, so it may
be that L is not one-ended. However, the only time those splittings arise in our construction are times
                          HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                           29


when finite edge stabilizers correspond to points in the limiting R–tree, and so do not need to be shortened.
Therefore, we can safely ignore splittings of L over finite groups.                                        


               6. Shortening quotients and reduction to non-divergent limit groups

  In this section, we continue to fix G, a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family of groups with hyper-
bolicity constant δ and acylindricity constants Rε , Nε .
  We start by recording some properties of non-divergent G–limit groups. When G consists of a single
hyperbolic group Γ acting on its Cayley graph, the non-divergent Γ–limit groups are all isomorphic to
subgroups of Γ. This is no longer true in the acylindrically hyperbolic setting, but we can say a few things.
Proposition 6.1. Suppose L is a non-divergent G–limit group. Then L admits an acylindrical action on a
hyperbolic metric space with the same acylindricity and hyperbolicity constants as G.

Proof. Suppose that (Γi , Xi ) ∈ G for i ≥ 1, such that ϕi : G → Γi and that L = G/ kerω (ϕi ). Fix basepoints
oi ∈ Xi as before. Then limω (kϕi k) < ∞ implies that L has a well-defined action on X∞ := limω (Xi , oi ),
which is δ–hyperbolic by Lemma 4.1. Note that in the non-divergent case, we are taking the ultralimit of
the spaces Xi without rescaling the metrics.
    Let ε > 0 and let x∞ = limω xi and y∞ = limω yi be distinct points of X∞ with d(x∞ , y∞ ) > Rε . Then
ω–almost surely, di (xi , yi ) > Rε . If g ∈ L and e   g ∈ ϕ−1
                                                             ∞ (g) such that d(gx∞ , x∞ ) < ε, then ω–almost surely
di (ϕi (e                                                                                              g ) 6= ϕi (e
        g )xi , xi ) < ε. Now if F is a finite set of distinct elements of L, then ω–almost surely ϕi (e          h) for
all g, h ∈ F . It follows that from these observations that if F ⊆ L is finite and
                                           d(x∞ , gx∞ ) < ε, d(y∞ , gy∞ ) < ε

for all g ∈ F , then there exists an index i such that for all g, h ∈ F , ϕi (e        g ) 6= ϕi (e
                                                                                                  h), d(xi , ϕi (e
                                                                                                                 g)xi ) < ε,
           g )yi ) < ε, and di (xi , yi ) > Rε . By the acylindricity of the action of Γi on Xi , we have |F | ≤ Nε . 
d(yi , ϕi (e

Lemma 6.2. Let L be a G–limit group defined by L = G/ kerω (ϕi ). If limω kϕi k < ∞, then every virtually
abelian subgroup in N LSE(L) is virtually cyclic.

Proof. Let M = limω kϕi k. It suffices to prove that any abelian subgroup in N LSE (L) is virtually cyclic.
Let H ∈ N LSE (L) and let H1 , H2 , . . . be in increasing sequence of finitely generated subgroups of H so that
H = ∩Hk . For each k, let H  e k ≤ G be a lift of Hk so that H e k−1 ≤ Hek .
   By Lemma 5.1 ω–almost surely there exist gi ∈ Γi so for each k ϕi (H      e k ) ≤ EΓi (gi ). By Lemma 2.10 there
are only finitely many isomorphism types of subgroups of the form EΓ (g) with Γ ∈ G and g loxodromic.
Therefore, ω–almost surely EΓi (gi ) is isomorphic to some fixed virtually cyclic group E. Let Z denote a
finite generating set for E, let E → EΓi (gi ) be some isomorphism, and let Zi be the image of Z under this
isomorphism. Since Hk is abelian, it must have abelian image in EΓi (gi ), so we may assume without loss of
generality that E has a finite normal subgroup with quotient infinite cyclic.
   By [5, Lemma 2.2] there exists a constant d which depends only on the hyperbolicity and acylindricity con-
stants so that for any loxodromic element g ∈ Γ ∈ G and any x ∈ XΓ we have τ (g) := limn→∞ n1 dXΓ (x, g n x) >
d. In particular, we have dXΓi (oi , gin oi ) ≥ nd. If follows that there are constants C and D (depending only on
the hyperbolicity and acylindricity constants) so that for any h ∈ EΓi (gi ) we have di (oi , hoi ) ≥ C|h|Zi − D.
   First consider elements of Hk of finite order. They map to elements of EΓi (gi ) of finite order, and there
are a uniformly bounded number of these. From this, it follows that there are a uniformly bounded number
of elements of Hk of finite order, and these form a finite normal subgroup of Hk .
   Suppose a, b ∈ Hk ≤ L have infinite order, and choose lifts e               a and eb such that |e   a|S = |a|ϕ∞ (S) and
 e
|b|S = |b|ϕ (S) . Then di (oi , ϕi (e
                                    a)oi ) ≤ |e                                e         e
                                              a|S (kϕi k + 1) and di (oi , ϕi (b)oi ) ≤ |b|S (kϕi k + 1).
           ∞
30                                              D. GROVES AND M. HULL


     Therefore,
                                            1                           M +1
                                 a)|Zi ≤
                            |ϕi (e                         a)oi ) + D ≤
                                              di (oi , ϕi (e                 |a|ϕ∞ (S) + D
                                            C                            C
and
                                            1                            M +1
                            |ϕi (eb)|Zi ≤     di (oi , ϕi (eb)oi ) + D ≤      |b|ϕ∞ (S) + D
                                            C                             C
   Since the bound on the word length of these elements in E is independent of i, there exist some r, s ∈ Z
such that ω–almost surely ϕi (e  ar ) = ϕi (ebs ), and hence ar = bs . It follows that a and b belong to the same
cyclic subgroup of Hk . Furthermore, if x ∈ Hk such that xn = a, then ω–almost surely ϕi (e          xn ) = ϕi (e
                                                                                                                a).
However, such an x can only exist for a bounded set of n, where the bound depends only on E and |ϕi (e      a)|Zi .
It follows that a can have only finitely many roots in Hk , and hence Hk must contain a primitive element
h. Since any two elements of Hk of infinite order belong to a common cyclic subgroup, we must have that
all infinite order elements of Hk belong to hhi. Since there are a uniformly bounded number of elements of
Hk of finite order, and all infinite order elements lie in a cyclic subgroup, Hk is virtually cyclic, with a finite
normal subgroup of uniformly bounded rank.
   Now consider the sequence of groups Hk ≤ Hk+1 ≤ . . .. This is an increasing sequence of virtually
cyclic groups with finite normal subgroups of bounded rank. Therefore, ω–almost surely the finite normal
subgroups are all the same subgroup N and we have cyclic groups Hk /N ≤ Hk+1 /N ≤ . . .. The same
argument as above bounds the size of the set of finite order elements of Hj independently of j, and also,
for infinite order a in Hk , bounds the index of a root of a ∈ Hk in any Hj for j ≥ k. This implies that the
ascending sequence of cyclic groups stabilizes, which implies that H is virtually cyclic, as required.    

   If we knew that G–limit groups were fully residually G, then we could define a divergent G–limit group L
via a sequence of homomorphisms (ϕi : L → Γi ) with kerω (ϕi ) = {1}. We could then define an equivalence
relation on homomorphisms from L → G by precomposing with elements of Mod(L) and post-composing
by conjugation in the element of G. If we take a sequence (ηi : L → Γi ) where each ηi is shortest in its
equivalence class, the shortening argument implies that kerω (ηi ) 6= {1}, i.e. L/ kerω (ηi ) is a proper quotient
of L, which we call a shortening quotient.
  However, we do not know that G–limit groups are fully residually G, so in order to construct shortening
quotients in general we have to proceed in a more complicated way.
   The following is essentially the same as [31, Lemma 6.1], and the proof which appears there works in our
situation without any changes. The idea of this construction comes from [36], and a similar construction
also appears in [12].
Lemma 6.3. Let G be finitely presented and let L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) be a divergent G–limit group which does not
split over Aufin relative to H. Let AM be the modular splitting of L from Definition 5.21. Then there exists
a sequence of finitely presented groups G = W0 , W1 , ... and epimorphisms fi : Wi → Wi+1 and hi : Wi → L
for i ≥ 0 such that:
      (1) ϕ∞ = h0 .
      (2) hi = hi+1 ◦ fi . for all i ≥ 1
      (3) L is the direct limit of the sequence G ։ W1 ։ .... Equivalently,
                                                       ∞
                                                       [
                                        kerω (ϕi ) =         ker(fk−1 ◦ . . . ◦ f0 )
                                                       k=1

      (4) Each Wi for i ≥ 1 has a graph of groups decomposition Ai whose underlying graph is isomorphic to
          the underlying graph of AM .
      (5) If V is a vertex group of AM and Vi is the corresponding vertex group of Ai , then hi (Vi ) ⊆ V .
          Furthermore,
                    S
                    ∞
           (a) V =     hi (Vi )
                   i=1
                         HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                        31


         (b) If V is QH(A,H) –vertex group, then hi |Vi is an isomorphism onto Vi
         (c) If V is a virtually abelian vertex group, then hi |Vi is injective.
    (6) If E is an edge group
                          S∞ of AM and Ei is the corresponding edge group of Ai , then hi maps Ei injectively
        into E and E = i=1 hi (Ei ).

   Let ξi : G → Wi be the natural map, that is ξi = fi−1 ◦ ... ◦ f0 . Note that for a fixed j, since Wj is finitely
presented ker(ξj ) ⊆ ker(ϕi ) for an ω large set of i. Hence after passing to a subsequence of (Wj , ξj ) and
re-indexing, we can assume that for all i we have ker(ξi ) ⊆ ker(ϕi ). This means that the map ϕi factors
through ξi , that is
                                                 ϕi = λi ◦ ξi
for some λi : Wi → Γi .
   Note that if a vertex group of AM is virtually abelian (respectively, a QH(A,H) –vertex group), then
the corresponding vertex group of Ai is virtually abelian (respectively, QH(A,H) ). We refer to all other
vertex groups of Ai as rigid since they correspond to rigid vertex groups of AM . Hence we can define an
equivalence relation on Hom(Wi , Γi ) using modular automorphism with respect to Ai in the same way as
                                                                             bi gives a new sequence
before. Replacing each λi with the shortest element of its equivalence class λ
                                                      bi ◦ ξi .
                                               ηi : = λ
Define Q = G/ kerω (ηi ). Since by Lemma 6.3.(3) and construction we have kerω (ϕi ) = kerω (ξi ) ⊆ kerω (ηi ),
there is a natural map π : L → Q, and Q is called a shortening quotient of L.
Lemma 6.4. Let L be a divergent G–limit group which does not split over Aufin relative to H and let
π : L → Q be a shortening quotient, via the construction (and with the notation) described above. Then π is
injective on the rigid vertex groups of the modular splitting of L. Furthermore, if limω (||ηi ||) = ∞ (so Q is
a divergent G–limit group), then π is a proper (non-injective) quotient map.

Proof. Suppose g ∈ L \ {1} belongs to a rigid vertex group of L and e   g ∈ ϕ−1
                                                                             ∞ (g). Then gi := ξi (e   g ) belongs to
the corresponding vertex group of Wi for sufficiently large i. This means that λbi (gi ) is conjugate to λi (gi ),
since modular automorphisms act by conjugation in Wi on rigid vertex groups. Since ge ∈              / kerω (ϕi ) and
ϕi = λi ◦ ξi , we get that ω–almost surely λi (gi ) 6= 1 and hence ω–almost surely λbi (gi ) 6= 1. Since ηi = λbi ◦ ξi ,
we get that η∞ (e g ) 6= 1, hence π(g) = η∞ (e
                                             g ) 6= 1.
   If L = Q = G/ kerω (ηi ) and kηi k is unbounded, then a natural adaptation of the shortening argument
(see Section 5.5) can be applied to the action of L on the limiting R–tree coming from the sequence (ηi ),
and this contradicts the shortness of the λbi for an ω–large set of i.                                 
Lemma 6.5. Let π : L → Q be a shortening quotient of a divergent G–limit group L which does not split
over Aufin relative to H, and suppose every non-(absolutely elliptic) virtually abelian subgroup of L is finitely
generated. If ηi ω–almost surely factors through η∞ , then ϕi ω–almost surely factors through ϕ∞ .

Proof. By assumption, all edge groups and hence all vertex groups of the modular decomposition of L are
finitely generated. Since QH(A,H) –vertex groups are finitely presented and finitely generated virtually abelian
groups are finitely presented, if follows that L is finitely presented relative to rigid vertex groups P1 , ..., Pn .
Since each Pj is finitely generated, it has a lift P fj such that ξi (Pej ) is contained in the corresponding vertex
group of Ai for all sufficiently large i. Since ϕi and ηi only differ by conjugation on these vertex groups, we
see that ω–almost surely ker(ηi |Pej ) = ker(ϕi |Pej ).
   Now, ker(ϕ∞ ) ⊆ ker(η∞ ) by construction and by hypothesis ω–almost surely we have ker(η∞ ) ⊆ ker(ηi ).
Hence ker(ϕ∞ ) ⊆ ker(ηi ) ω–almost surely. Thus, for each Pj , ω–almost surely so ker(ϕ∞ |Pej ) ⊆ ker(ηi |Pej ) =
ker(ϕi |Pej ). Now Lemma 3.19 implies that ϕi ω–almost surely factors through ϕ∞ .                              

  Suppose now that L does split over Aufin relative to H. In this case, we start by taking a Linnell
decomposition DL , which is a (Aufin , H) JSJ-decomposition in the sense of Guirardel-Levitt (see [25] and
32                                          D. GROVES AND M. HULL


[17]). In particular, each vertex group of DL does not split over any subgroup of Aufin relative to H. Hence
we can apply the above construction of shortening quotients to each vertex group of DL , then “glue” the
shortening quotients together in the natural way to form a shortening quotient of L, and this shortening
quotient of L is a G–limit group. This procedure is the same as that described after the proof of [31,
Proposition 6.2].
     The proof of the following lemma is contained in the proof of [31, Proposition 6.3].
Lemma 6.6. Using the above description of shortening quotients, Lemmas 6.4 and 6.5 hold without the
assumption that L does not split over Aufin relative to H.

  We next want to understand when G–limit groups satisfy the hypothesis of Lemma 6.5, that is when all
non-absolutely elliptic virtually abelian subgroups are finitely generated.
Lemma 6.7. Suppose a G–limit group L contains a non-absolutely elliptic virtually abelian subgroup which
is not finitely generated. Then there exists an infinite sequence of divergent G–limit groups
                                                   α1    α2
                                                L ։ S1 ։ · · · ,
such that each αj is a proper quotient map.

Proof. Let A be a non-(absolutely elliptic) virtually abelian subgroup of L which is not finitely generated.
We first show that some rigid vertex group in the modular splitting of L contains an infinitely generated
non-(absolutely elliptic) virtually abelian subgroup. By Theorem 5.20 and the construction of the modular
splitting, after replacing A with a conjugate we can assume that A is contained in a vertex group Lv of
the modular splitting of L. QH(A,H) –vertex groups do not contain infinitely generated virtually abelian
subgroups, so Lv is either virtually abelian or rigid. If Lv is virtually abelian, it must be infinitely generated
since it contains an infinitely generated subgroup A. Since L is finitely generated, Lv is finitely generated
relative to the adjacent edge groups, so there is some edge e adjacent to v such that Le is infinitely generated.
By construction of the modular splitting, the other vertex u adjacent to e must correspond to a rigid vertex
group Lu . Hence, in either case L must have a rigid vertex group which contains a non-absolutely elliptic
virtually abelian subgroup B which is not finitely generated.
   Let (ϕi ) from Hom(Fn , G) be a divergent defining sequence for L such that B ∈ N LSE (L) with respect
to the sequence (ϕi ). Note that (ϕi ) must be a divergent sequence by Lemma 6.2. Let S1 be a shortening
quotient of L constructed as above starting with the defining sequence (ϕi ). Let α1 : L ։ S1 be the
corresponding quotient map. Then B embeds in S1 by Lemmas 6.4 and 6.6. Furthermore, because shortening
moves act by conjugation on rigid vertex groups, B ∈ N LSE (S1 ) with respect to the constructed defining
sequence for S1 . By Lemma 6.2, this defining sequence must be divergent, and hence α1 is a proper quotient
map by Lemmas 6.4 and 6.6.
   Now B is a non-(absolutely elliptic) virtually abelian subgroup of S1 which is not finitely generated, and
so we can repeat the above argument inductively to obtain a sequence

                                                    α1    α2
                                                  L ։ S1 ։ ...
where each Sj is a divergent G–limit group and each αj is a proper quotient map.                                

   In order to ensure that there are no infinite descending sequences of G–limit groups we need an assumption
about the non-divergent G–limit groups. Such an assumption is required for our approach because techniques
using limiting R–trees cannot be applied to non-divergent G–limit groups.
     The next theorem is similar to [22, Theorem 13]. See also [37, Theorem 1.12].
Theorem 6.8. Suppose that for any finitely generated group G and any non-divergent sequence (ϕi ) from
Hom(G, G), ϕi factors through the limit map ϕ∞ ω–almost surely. Then there is no infinite sequence of
                       HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                  33


G–limit groups
                                                   α1    α2
                                                L1 ։ L2 ։ ...
such that each αi is a proper quotient map.
Remark 6.9. In Theorem B below we prove that if G is a uniformly acylindrical family of groups satisfying
the hypothesis of Theorem 6.8 then G is an equationally noetherian family of groups. The converse follows
from Proposition 3.7.

Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that some infinite descending sequence of G–limit groups exists as
                                                                                            β1
above. By Lemma 3.11, we can assume that there exists a sequence of G–limit groups R1 ։ R2 ... with each
Rn = Fn / kerω (ϕni ) and ϕn∞ ◦ βn = ϕn+1
                                      ∞    for all n. We further assume that, for each n ≥ 1, Rn+1 is chosen
such that if Rn ։ S ։ ... is any infinite descending sequence of G–limit groups with S = Fn / kerω (ρi ), then
                                     | ker(ρ∞ ) ∩ Bn | ≤ | ker(ϕn+1
                                                                ∞ ) ∩ Bn |

  where Bn denote the ball of radius n in Fn with respect to the word metric.
   Now choose a diagonal sequence (ψi = ϕini ), where ni is chosen such that ker(ψi ) ∩ Bi = ker(ϕi∞ ) ∩ Bi
                                                                                               S∞
and for some g ∈ ker(ϕi+1
                       ∞ ), g ∈ / ker(ψi ). Let R∞ = G/ kerω (ψi ); by construction, ker(ψ∞ ) = j=1 ker(ϕj∞ ),
that is R∞ is also the direct limit of the sequence Fn ։ R1 ։ R2 ։ ....
  Next we show that every descending sequence of G–limit groups of the form
                                              R∞ ։ L1 ։ L2 ...
with proper quotient maps is finite. Indeed, if some element g ∈ Bn maps trivially to L1 but not to R∞ ,
then g must map non-trivially to Rn+1 . But there is an infinite descending sequence Rn ։ L1 ։ ..., so this
contradicts our choice of Rn+1 .
   Since there is no infinite descending chain which starts at R∞ , any sequence of proper shortening quotients
of R∞ is finite. Thus, R∞ admits a finite sequence of proper shortening quotients
                                              R∞ ։ S1 ... ։ Sn .
Clearly there can be no infinite descending chain starting at any Sj for 1 ≤ j ≤ n, so by Lemma 6.7 we get
that all non-(absolutely elliptic) virtually abelian subgroups of R∞ and of each Sj are finitely generated.
Since Sn = G/ kerω (ηin ) is non-divergent, by assumption ηin ω–almost surely factors through η∞
                                                                                               n
                                                                                                 . Hence we
can inductively apply Lemma 6.5 to get that ψi ω–almost surely factors through ψ∞ . But then there exists
i such that ker(ψi ) ⊆ ker(ψ∞ ) ⊆ ker(ϕi+1
                                        ∞ ), which contradicts our construction of ψi .
                                                                                                             

  As noted in the introduction, the following is our main technical theorem.
Theorem B. Suppose that G is uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family. Furthermore, suppose that when-
ever G is a finitely generated group and ηi : G → G is a non-divergent sequence of homomorphisms, ηi
ω–almost surely factors through the limit map η∞ . Then G is equationally noetherian.

Proof. Let (ϕi : G → G) be a divergent sequence of homomorphisms, and let L be the associated limit group.
By Theorem 6.8, any sequence of proper shortening quotients of L eventually terminates in a limit group
Sn which is non-divergent by Lemmas 6.4 and 6.6. If (ηi ) is the corresponding non-divergent sequence of
homomorphisms, then ηi factors through the limit map η∞ ω–almost surely by assumption. Lemma 6.7
together with Theorem 6.8 imply that any non-(absolutely elliptic) virtually abelian subgroup of any G–
limit group is finitely generated. Hence we can inductively apply Lemmas 6.5 and 6.6 to the sequence of
shortening quotients of L to get that ϕi factors through ϕ∞ ω–almost surely, so G is equationally noetherian
by Theorem 3.7.                                                                                            

  We begin with a straightforward application of Theorem B to maps to free products.
34                                           D. GROVES AND M. HULL

                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                            ∞
Definition 6.10. Let G be a family of groups and let G ∗n = {Γ1 ∗ ... ∗ Γn | Γ1 , ..., Γn ∈ G}. Let G ∗ =         G ∗n .
                                                                                                            i=1

   By considering the action of an element of G ∗ on the Bass–Serre tree of the free splitting, we have the
following obvious result.
Lemma 6.11. The set G ∗ is a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family of groups.

  The following result is very similar in nature to the results in the first part of [22], though this result does
not appear there.
Corollary C. If G is an equationally noetherian family of groups, then G ∗ is an equationally noetherian
family of groups.

Proof. Let G be a finitely generated group (with a fixed finite generating set). As noted in Lemma 6.11
above, G ∗ is a uniformly acylindrically hyperbolic family. Hence, we can apply Theorem B, and we only need
to deal with non-divergent sequences of homomorphisms from Hom(G, G ∗ ).
   Let (ϕi ) be a non-divergent sequence from Hom(G, G ∗ ). The space of (projectivized) G–trees is compact,
and so there is a limiting action of L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) on a tree. Since ϕi is non-divergent, this action is
simplicial, and it is clear that edge stabilizers are trivial.
   This implies that there is an induced free splitting of L. Since L is finitely generated, the vertex groups
of this splitting are finitely generated, and so they are G–limit groups. It is now clear that the ϕi must
ω–almost surely factor through ϕ∞ : G → L, as required.                                                     

   As suggested in [22], it is tempting to try to generalize Corollary C to k–acylindrical actions with vertex
stabilizers in an equationally noetherian family. Theorem B still applies in this setting. However, it is hard
to control the edge groups in the limiting tree in the non-divergent case, and in particular we do not know
how to prove they are finitely generated.
   In the next section, we provide a much more involved application of Theorem B to relatively hyperbolic
groups.

                                     7. Relatively hyperbolic groups

7.1. Definitions and properties.
                             S      Let Γ be a group and {P1 , ..., Pn } a collection of subgroups of Γ, called
peripheral subgroups. Let P = ni=1 (Pi \ {1}). Let A ⊆ Γ such that hA ∪ Pi = Γ.
  Let F (A) be the free group on the set A, and let F = F (A) ∗ P1 ∗ ... ∗ Pn then there is a natural surjective
homomorphism
                                                  F ։Γ
which is the identity when restricted to A and to each Pi . If the kernel of this homomorphism is normally
generated by a set R ⊆ F , then we say that
(†)                                             hA, P1 , ..., Pn | Ri
is a presentation for Γ relative to {P1 , ..., Pn }, or simply a relative presentation for Γ if the peripheral
subgroups are understood. We say that Γ is finitely generated relative to {P1 , ..., Pn } if there exists a finite
set A ⊆ Γ such that hA ∪ Pi = Γ. We say that Γ is finitely presented relative to {P1 , ..., Pn } if Γ has a relative
presentation of the form (†) with both A and R finite.
   Note that the sets A, P1 ,...,Pn are not necessarily disjoint in Γ, but they are disjoint when considered as
subsets of F . We use the notation A ⊔ P when we are considering A and P as subsets of F to emphasize this
disjointness. In particular, when considering words in the alphabet A⊔P, we consider elements which belong
to A as distinct letters from elements that belong to any peripheral subgroup even when they represent the
                        HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                   35


same element in Γ. Similarly, elements which belong to distinct peripheral subgroups in F are considered as
distinct letters in A ⊔ P even then they represent the same element of Γ.
  Suppose Γ has a relative presentation of the form (†). Let W be a word in the alphabet A ⊔ P such that
W =Γ 1. Then by the definition of R, there exists r1 , ..., rk ∈ R and f1 , ..., fk ∈ F such that
                                                      k
                                                      Y
                                              W =F          fi−1 ri fi .
                                                      i=1
                                       rel
The relative area of W , denoted Area (W ), is defined as the minimal k such that W can be expressed as
above.
Definition 7.1. [27] Let Γ be a group and {P1 , ..., Pn } be a collection of subgroups of Γ. Then Γ is hyperbolic
relative to {P1 , ..., Pn } if Γ has a finite relative presentation of the form (†) and there exists a constant K
such that for any word W in A ⊔ P with W =Γ 1,
                                             Arearel (W ) ≤ K|W |,
where |W | denotes the word length of W .

   Given a word W in the alphabet A ⊔ P, W =Γ 1 if and only if there exists a van Kampen diagram for W
over (†), that is an oriented, connected, simply connected, planar 2–complex ∆ such that each edge of ∆ is
labeled by an element of A ⊔ P, Lab(∂∆) ≡ W , and for each 2–cell Π of ∆ either Lab(Π) belongs to R or
there exists 1 ≤ i ≤ n such that each edge of ∂Π is labeled by an element of Pi and Lab(∂Π) =Pi 1. The
cells whose labels belongs to R are called R–cells. It is easy to see that Arearel (W ) is equal to the minimal
number of R–cells in a van Kampen diagram for W .
Lemma 7.2. [27, Lemma 2.15] For any word W in A ⊔ P with W =Γ 1, there exists a van Kampen diagram
∆ over (†) such that every internal edge of ∆ belongs to the boundary of an R–cell and the number of R–cells
of ∆ is equal to Arearel (W ).

   Let Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P) denote the Cayley graph of Γ corresponding to the alphabet A ⊔ P. Each edge of
Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P) is labeled by an element of A ⊔ P, and we denote the label of an edge e by Lab(e). Note that
this graph may have multiple edges (with different labels) when distinct elements of A ⊔ P represent the
same element of Γ. The first part of the following theorem is [27, Theorem 1.7], and is part of proving that
the above definition of relative hyperbolicity is equivalent to Farb’s definition from [10]. The second part of
the following theorem is [28, Proposition 5.2].
Theorem 7.3. [27, 28] Suppose Γ is hyperbolic relative to {P1 , ..., Pn } and A ⊆ Γ is a finite relative
generating set. Then
   (1) Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P) is a hyperbolic metric space.
   (2) The action of Γ on Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P) is acylindrical.

   When Γ is hyperbolic relative to {P1 , ..., Pn }, we can define an associated metric dˆj : Pj → [0, ∞] on
each Pj , called the relative metric. Note that we allow these metrics to take infinite values. For each Pj ,
the Cayley graph Cay(Pj , Pj r {1}) is naturally embedded as a complete subgraph of Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P). For
f, g ∈ Pj , let dˆj (f, g) equal the length of the shortest path from f to g in Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P) which contains
no edges in the subgraph Cay(Pj , Pj r {1}), or dˆj (f, g) = ∞ if no such path exists. For g ∈ Pj , we let
|g|j = dˆj (1, g).
   Fix a sufficiently large constant D (see [28, Equation 29]). Let p be a geodesic in Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P). We say
that p penetrates a coset xPj if p decomposes as p = p1 ep2 where e is an edge such that Lab(e) ∈ Pj and
Lab(p1 ) =Γ x. In this case we say that e is inside the coset xPj . Furthermore, we say that p essentially
penetrates the coset xPj if in addition |Lab(e)|j ≥ D.
36                                              D. GROVES AND M. HULL


  Given g ∈ Γ, let S(g) be the set of cosets of peripheral subgroups which are essentially penetrated by
some geodesic in Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P) from 1 to g. Cosets in S(g) are called separating cosets.
   The following is proved in the more general context of hyperbolically embedded subgroups as [28, Lemma
4.8].
Lemma 7.4. For any g ∈ Γ, the set S(g) can be ordered as S(g) = {C1 , ..., Cm } such that for any geodesic
p in Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P) from 1 to g, p decomposes as
                                                p = p1 e1 p2 e2 ...em pm+1
where each pj is a (possibly trivial) subpath of p which essentially penetrates no cosets and each ej is an edge
of p which is inside Cj .

   The point is that any two geodesics with the same endpoints essentially penetrate the same cosets in the
same order. Note also that for any pj in the above decomposition of p, the label of each edge of pj belongs
to a finite set B = A ⊔ (⊔ni=1 {g ∈ Pi | |g|i ≤ D}, where D is the constant fixed above.

7.2. Equationally noetherian. In this section we prove Theorem D. For the convenience of the reader,
we recall the statement.
Theorem D. If Γ is hyperbolic relative to equationally noetherian groups, then Γ is equationally noetherian.

Proof. Suppose Γ is hyperbolic relative to {P1 , ..., Pn } and that each Pj is equationally noetherian. Suppose
Γ has a finite relative presentation of the form (†), and let X = Cay(Γ, A ⊔ P). For g ∈ Γ, let |g| = dX (1, g)
and for g ∈ Pj , recall that |g|j = dˆj (1, g). Let B = A ⊔ ⊔nj=1 {g ∈ Pj | |g|j ≤ D} . By Theorem 7.3, X is
δ–hyperbolic for some δ and the action of Γ on X is acylindrical. Thus, consider the set G = {(Γ, X)}.
  Let G be a finitely generated group and (ϕi ) a sequence from Hom(G, Γ) with limω (kϕi k) < ∞. By
Theorem B, to prove Theorem D it suffices to show that ω–almost surely ϕi factors through ϕ∞ . Let
L = G/ kerω (ϕi ) be the associated (non-divergent) Γ–limit group.
   Let S = {s1 , ..., sm } be a finite generating set for G. After conjugating each ϕi , we can assume that
kϕi k = maxs∈S |ϕi (s)|. Fix 1 ≤ j ≤ m. Since ω–almost surely we have |ϕi (sj )| ≤ kϕi k ≤ limω (kϕi k) < ∞,
there is some fixed 0 ≤ kj ≤ limω (kϕi k) such that ω–almost surely |ϕi (sj )| = kj . Let pji be a geodesic in X
from 1 to ϕi (sj ). Since ω–almost surely the number of separating cosets |S(ϕi (sj ))| ≤ ℓ(pji ) = kj , we see
that |S(ϕi (sj ))| is ω–almost surely constant. Denote this (ω–almost surely) constant value for |S(ϕ(sj ))| by
mj . Now pji has a decomposition as in Lemma 7.4, so we can write

                                          pji = qi,1
                                                 j
                                                     eji,1 qi,2
                                                            j
                                                                eji,2 ...eji,mj qi,m
                                                                                 j
                                                                                     j +1
               j
where each qi,k    is a (possibly trivial) subpath of pji with each edge labeled by an element of B and each
                                                                                     Pmj +1
eji,k is an edge of pij which is inside a separating coset. Since ω–almost surely k=1                j
                                                                                                 ℓ(qi,k ) ≤ kj , there are
                                                                           j         j              j
ω–almost surely only finitely many possible configurations of the list (ℓ(qi,1 ), ℓ(qi,2 ), ..., ℓ(qi,mj +1 )). Therefore
         j
each ℓ(qi,k ) is fixed ω–almost surely, and since its label belongs to the finite set B, in fact the label of each
qi,k is ω–almost surely independent of i. Similarly, for each eji,k , the label of eji,k belongs to a subgroup Ptj
 j
                                                                                                                        k

which is ω–almost surely independent of i; however, there are infinitely many choices for the label of eji,k , so
this stills depend on i.
     In particular, ω–almost surely we have ϕi (sj ) =Γ W1j gi,1
                                                             j
                                                                 W2j ...gi,m
                                                                         j
                                                                             j
                                                                                j
                                                                               Wm j +1
                                                                                       , where each Wkj is a word in B
          j
and each gi,k is an element of Ptj .
                                     k

   We now define a set of abstract letters for each 1 ≤ j ≤ m, {hj1 , ..., hjmj } and also an abstract set of
letters B together with a fixed bijection B → B. Let A ⊆ B be the subset corresponding to A ⊆ B. Let
                        HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                     37


Z be the set of all such abstract letters, that is Z = B ⊔ {hjk | 1 ≤ j ≤ m, 1 ≤ k ≤ mj }. For each Wkj ,
let Ukj be the corresponding word in B. There is a function S → F (Z), defined by sending each sj to
                     j
U1j hj1 U2j ...hjmj Um j +1
                            . Let N ≤ F (Z) be the normal subgroup generated by the image of the relations in G.
Then we get a homomorphism ρ : G → H, where H = F (Z)/N .
    Recall that for each eji,k , there is a corresponding peripheral subgroup which contains the label of eji,k and
which is ω–almost surely independent of i. Let Jt be the subgroup of H which is generated by the image of
all abstract letters corresponding to Pt . More precisely, Jt is generated by the image of all abstract letters
b̄ ∈ B \ A such that the corresponding element b ∈ B \ A belongs to Pt together with the image of all abstract
letters of the form hjk such that the peripheral subgroup corresponding to eji,k is ω–almost surely equal to
Pt .
   Now we define a sequence of homomorphisms (ϕ̂i : H ∗ (∗nt=1 Pt ) → Γ) which are the identity on each Pt
and which send each element of B to the corresponding element of B and each hjk to Lab(eji,k ). It follows
easily from the construction that ϕi = ϕ̂i ◦ ρ.
   We now define the Γ–limit group W = (H ∗ (∗nt=1 Pt ))/ kerω (ϕ̂i ), and note that ϕ̂∞ ◦ ρ : G → W . Since
ϕi = ϕ̂i ◦ ρ, we get
                           ker(ϕ∞ ) = kerω (ϕi ) = kerω (ϕ̂i ◦ ρ) = ker(ϕ̂∞ ◦ ρ)
  Thus, there is a natural injective homomorphism ι : L ֒→ W .

                                                         H ∗ (∗nt=1 Pt )
                                                ρ                              ϕ̂∞
                                                                 ϕ̂i
                                                    ϕi
                                            G                  Γ                     W
                                                ϕ∞                         ι
                                                               L
   Since Jt ≤ H, there is a natural inclusion Jt ∗ Pt ֒→ H ∗ (∗nt=1 Pt ). Define Qt := ϕ̂∞ (Jt ∗ Pt ). Note that
each Qt is a Pt –limit group, since Jt ∗ Pt is finitely generated and ϕ̂i |(Jt ∗Pt ) : (Jt ∗ Pt ) → Pt is a defining
sequence of maps for Qt . Also the restriction of ϕ̂i to Pt is injective for all i, so we can identify Pt with its
image in Qt . Our next goal is to argue that W is hyperbolic relative to {Q1 , ..., Qn }. Let Q = ⊔nt=1 (Qt \ {1}).
Note that by identifying Pt with its image in Qt we get a natural inclusion P ⊆ Q.
  Recall that Γ has the finite relative presentation
(1)                                                 hA, P1 , ..., Pn | Ri.
For each r ∈ R, let r be the word in A ⊔ Q obtained by replacing each A–letter in r with the corresponding
letter of A and considering each P letter as a letter in Q via the inclusion of P into Q. Since r is a word in
A ⊔ P, it defines an element of H ∗ (∗nt=1 Pt ). Clearly ϕ̂i (r) = 1 ω–almost surely, so r =W 1.
  Let R = {r | r ∈ R}. Then we claim that
                                                 hA, Q1 , ..., Qm | Ri
is a finite relative presentation for W .
  First observe that A ⊔ Q generates W . This is because Z ⊔ P generates H ∗ (∗nt=1 Pt ), P ⊆ Q and for all
Z ∈ Z \ A, ϕ̂∞ (z) ∈ Qt for some 1 ≤ t ≤ n.
   Suppose U is a word in A ⊔ Q such that U =W 1. Let U      e be the word in A ⊔ (⊔1≤t≤n (Jt ∗ Pt )) obtained
by replacing each Qt –letter h in U with e       −1
                                          h ∈ ϕ̂∞ (h). Let Ui be the image of U  e under ϕ̂i , that is the word
                                           e
obtained by applying ϕ̂i to each letter of U ; equivalently, Ui is obtained from U by replacing each A–letter
is by the corresponding element of A in Γ and replacing each Qt letter h by ϕ̂i (e h). Note that Ui is a word
in A ⊔ P and Ui =Γ 1 ω–almost surely.
38                                              D. GROVES AND M. HULL


   Now, by definition of relative hyperbolicity, ω–almost surely there exists van Kampen diagrams ∆i over
(1) such that Lab(∂∆i ) ≡ Ui and the number of R–cells of ∆i is bounded by KkUi k = KkU k. By Lemma
7.2, each ∆i can be chosen such that every internal edge of ∆i belongs to the boundary of an R–cell. Since
there is a uniform bound on the number of R–cells in each ∆i and a uniform bound on the number of edges
in the boundary of any R–cell, we get a uniform bound on the total number of edges in ∆i . Since there are
only finitely many (unlabeled) 2–complexes with a fixed number of edges, ω–almost surely the ∆i ’s all have
a fixed isomorphism type as (unlabeled) 2–complexes.
   Now let ∆ be an abstract 2–complex which ω–almost surely has the same isomorphism type as ∆i . Let
Π be a 2–cell of ∆, and let Πi be the corresponding 2–cell of ∆i . Then there are two possibilities for Πi .
The first is that ω–almost surely Πi is an R–cell in ∆i . In this case, since R is finite, there is ω–almost
surely a fixed r ∈ R such that Lab(∂Πi ) ≡ r. In particular, since every internal edge of ∆i belongs to the
boundary of an R–cell, this means that ω–almost surely the label of every internal edge of ∆i is fixed. The
second possibility is that ω–almost surely Πi is not an R–cell. In this case, there is ω-almost surely a fixed
1 ≤ t ≤ n such that, each edge of Πi is labeled by an element of Pt and Lab(∂Πi ) =Pt 1.
   For each internal edge e of ∆, e is ω–almost surely labeled by a fixed element of A ⊔ P in ∆i , so we label
e in ∆ by the corresponding element of A ⊔ Q. For each external edge e, the label of e occurs in a fixed
position in each Ui , and we label e in ∆ by the corresponding letter in U .
   Suppose Π is a 2–cell of ∆. If Πi ω–almost surely occurs as an R–cell in ∆i , then the label of Π in ∆
belongs to R. If Πi ω–almost surely occurs as an Pt –cell in ∆i , then the label of Π in ∆ is a word in Qt .
Indeed, for each edge e of Π which is internal in ∆, the label of e is an element of Pt ⊆ Qt . For each external
edge e, with label h, we have that ω–almost surely ϕ̂i (eh) ∈ Pt , hence eh ∈ Jt ∗ Pt and h ∈ Qt .
   Thus, in the second case the label of ∂Π is a word in Qt whose image in Γ is ω–almost surely trivial
since it maps to the boundary of 2–cell in ∆i . Therefore, ∆ is a van Kampen diagram for U over the
relative presentation hA, Q1 , ..., Qn | Ri. Hence this is a presentation for W , and furthermore Arearel (U ) ≤
Arearel (∆) ≤ KkU k, which shows that W is hyperbolic relative to {Q1 , ..., Qn }.
   In particular, we have shown that W is finitely presented relative to {Q1 , ..., Qn }. Since each Pt is
equationally noetherian, ω–almost surely the maps ϕ̂i |(Jt ∗Pt ) : (Jt ∗ Pt ) → Pt factor through the limit map
ϕ̂∞ |(Jt ∗Pt ) . Thus, by Lemma 3.19, ϕ̂i ω–almost surely factors through ϕ̂∞ .
  Finally, we show that ϕi ω–almost surely factors through ϕ∞ , concluding the proof. Recall that ϕi = ϕ̂i ◦ρ.
Hence ker(ϕ̂∞ ) ⊆ ker(ϕ̂i ) which implies that ker(ϕ∞ ) = ker(ϕ̂∞ ◦ ρ) ⊆ ker(ϕ̂i ◦ ρ) = ker(ϕi ). Therefore, ϕi
ω–almost surely factors through ϕ∞ .                                                                         

     The above proof also shows the following.
Corollary 7.5. Suppose Γ is hyperbolic relative to {P1 , ..., Pn } and L is a non-divergent Γ–limit group.
Then there exists a group W which is hyperbolic relative to {D1 , ..., Dn } such that L embeds into W and
each Di is a Pi –limit group.


                                                      References
 [1] E. Alibegović. Makanin-Razborov diagrams for limit groups. Geom. Topol., 11:643–666, 2007.
 [2] G. Baumslag, A. Myasnikov, and V. Remeslennikov. Algebraic geometry over groups. I. Algebraic sets and ideal theory. J.
     Algebra, 219(1):16–79, 1999.
 [3] M. Bestvina. Degenerations of the hyperbolic space. Duke Math. J., 56(1):143–161, 1988.
 [4] M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. Stable actions of groups on real trees. Invent. Math., 121(2):287–321, 1995.
 [5] B. H. Bowditch. Tight geodesics in the curve complex. Invent. Math., 171(2):281–300, 2008.
 [6] M. R. Bridson and A. Haefliger. Metric Spaces of Non–Positive Curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren der mathematischen
     Wissenschaften. Springer–Verlag, Berlin, 1999.
 [7] M. R. Bridson and G. A. Swarup. On Hausdorff-Gromov convergence and a theorem of Paulin. Enseign. Math. (2),
     40(3-4):267–289, 1994.
 [8] M. Casals-Ruiz and I. V. Kazachkov. On systems of equations over free products of groups. J. Algebra, 333:368–426, 2011.
                           HOMOMORPHISMS TO ACYLINDRICALLY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, I                                               39


 [9] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, and D. Osin. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and rotating families in groups acting on
     hyperbolic spaces. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 245(1156):v+152, 2017.
[10] B. Farb. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Geom. Funct. Anal., 8(5):810–840, 1998.
[11] M. Gromov. Hyperbolic groups. In Essays in group theory, volume 8 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 75–263. Springer,
     New York, 1987.
[12] D. Groves. Limit groups for relatively hyperbolic groups. II. Makanin-Razborov diagrams. Geom. Topol., 9:2319–2358,
     2005.
[13] D. Groves. Limit groups for relatively hyperbolic groups. I. The basic tools. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 9(3):1423–1466, 2009.
[14] D. Groves and H. Wilton. Enumerating limit groups. Groups Geom. Dyn., 3(3):389–399, 2009.
[15] V. S. Guba. Equivalence of infinite systems of equations in free groups and semigroups to finite subsystems. Mat. Zametki,
     40(3):321–324, 428, 1986.
[16] V. Guirardel. Actions of finitely generated groups on R-trees. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 58(1):159–211, 2008.
[17] V. Guirardel and G. Levitt. JSJ decompositions of groups. arxiv:1602.05139, 2016.
[18] Vincent Guirardel. Limit groups and groups acting freely on Rn -trees. Geom. Topol., 8:1427–1470 (electronic), 2004.
[19] Ch. K. Gupta and N. S. Romanovskiı̆. The property of being equational Noetherian of some solvable groups. Algebra
     Logika, 46(1):46–59, 124, 2007.
[20] G.C. Hruska, B. Kleiner, and (with an appendix written jointly with M. Hindawi). Hadamard spaces with isolated flats.
     Geometry and Topology, 9:1501–1538, 2005.
[21] HJRW (http://mathoverflow.net/users/1463/hjrw). Is there a non-hopfian lacunary hyperbolic group? MathOverflow.
     URL:http://mathoverflow.net/q/75784 (version: 2011-09-28).
[22] E. Jaligot and Z. Sela. Makanin-Razborov diagrams over free products. Illinois J. Math., 54(1):19–68, 2010.
[23] O. Kharlampovich and A. Myasnikov. Irreducible affine varieties over a free group. I. Irreducibility of quadratic equations
     and Nullstellensatz. J. Algebra, 200(2):472–516, 1998.
[24] O. Kharlampovich and A. Myasnikov. Irreducible affine varieties over a free group. II. Systems in triangular quasi-quadratic
     form and description of residually free groups. J. Algebra, 200(2):517–570, 1998.
[25] P. A. Linnell. On accessibility of groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 30(1):39–46, 1983.
[26] A. Yu. Ol′ shanskiı̆. On residualing homomorphisms and G-subgroups of hyperbolic groups. Internat. J. Algebra Comput.,
     3(4):365–409, 1993.
[27] D. V. Osin. Relatively hyperbolic groups: intrinsic geometry, algebraic properties, and algorithmic problems. Mem. Amer.
     Math. Soc., 179(843):vi+100, 2006.
[28] D. V. Osin. Acylindrically hyperbolic groups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 368(2):851–888, 2016.
[29] Abderezak Ould Houcine. Limit groups of equationally Noetherian groups. In Geometric group theory, Trends Math., pages
     103–119. Birkhäuser, Basel, 2007.
[30] F. Paulin. Outer automorphisms of hyperbolic groups and small actions on R-trees. In Arboreal group theory (Berkeley,
     CA, 1988), volume 19 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 331–343. Springer, New York, 1991.
[31] C. Reinfeldt and R. Weidmann. Makanin-Razborov diagrams for hyperbolic groups. preprint, 2014.
[32] E. Rips and Z. Sela. Structure and rigidity in hyperbolic groups. I. Geom. Funct. Anal., 4(3):337–371, 1994.
[33] N. S. Romanovskiı̆. Equational Noetherianity of rigid solvable groups. Algebra Logika, 48(2):258–279, 284, 287, 2009.
[34] Z. Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups: a list of research problems. http://www.ma.huji.ac.il/ zlil/problems.dvi.
[35] Z. Sela. Acylindrical accessibility for groups. Invent. Math., 129(3):527–565, 1997.
[36] Z. Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups. I. Makanin-Razborov diagrams. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci., 93:31–
     105, 2001.
[37] Z. Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups. VII. The elementary theory of a hyperbolic group. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3),
     99(1):217–273, 2009.
[38] Z. Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups. X: The elementary theory of free products. arXiv:1012.0044, 2010.
[39] D. Vallino. Algebraic and definable closure in free groups. Theses, Université Claude Bernard - Lyon I, June 2012.
[40] L. van den Dries and A. J. Wilkie. Gromov’s theorem on groups of polynomial growth and elementary logic. J. Algebra,
     89(2):349–374, 1984.
[41] R. Weidmann. On accessibility of finitely generated groups. Q. J. Math., 63(1):211–225, 2012.
[42] J. Wiegold. Groups with boundedly finite classes of conjugate elements. Proc. Roy. Soc. London. Ser. A., 238:389–401,
     1957.
[43] H. Wilton and P. Zalesskii. Profinite properties of graph manifolds. Geom. Dedicata, 147(1):29–45, 2010.

  Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, 322 Science
and Engineering Offices (M/C 249), 851 S. Morgan St., Chicago IL 60607, USA
   E-mail address: groves@math.uic.edu

   Department of Mathematics, University of Florida, 358 Little Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
   E-mail address: mbhull@ufl.edu
