Illinois Journal of Mathematics
Volume 54, Number 1, Spring 2010, Pages 175–186
S 0019-2082




       COMPUTING FIXED CLOSURES IN FREE GROUPS

                                    ENRIC VENTURA

                        To Paul Schupp, colleague and friend.

          Abstract. Let F be a ﬁnitely generated free group. We present
          an algorithm such that, given a subgroup H ≤ F , decides whether
          H is the ﬁxed subgroup of some family of automorphisms, or
          family of endomorphisms of F and, in the aﬃrmative case, ﬁnds
          such a family. The algorithm combines both combinatorial and
          geometric methods.



                                    1. Introduction
    For all the paper, let A = {a1 , . . . , an } be an alphabet with n diﬀerent
letters, and F be the free group (of rank r(F ) = n) with basis A.
    Let End(F ) denote the endomorphism monoid of F , and Aut(F ) the auto-
morphism group of F , so Aut(F ) is the group of units of End(F ). Throughout,
we let elements of End(F ) act on the right on F , so x → (x)φ. Accordingly,
compositions are like (x)φψ = (xφ)ψ.
   In the last decade, a lot of literature has appeared studying the ﬁxed sub-
group of a single, or a family, of automorphisms, or endomorphisms, of F (see
the survey [19] for details). But very few algorithmic results are known in this
direction. Only few years ago, O. Maslakova (see [13]) has found an algorithm
to compute a set of generators for the ﬁxed subgroup of an automorphism of
F (which is quite complicated, and whose complexity is quite high). One can
easily extend this to compute generators for the ﬁxed subgroup of a ﬁnite
family of automorphisms, while the related questions on endomorphisms are
still open.

  Received October 5, 2009; received in ﬁnal form April 27, 2010.
  The author gratefully acknowledges partial support from the MEC (Spain) and the
EFRD (EC) through project number MTM2008-01550.
  2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 20E05, 20E36.

                                                             2011
                                                             c     University of Illinois

                                              175
176                              E. VENTURA


   In this note, we shall address the dual problem. We present an algorithm
such that, given a subgroup H ≤ F , decides whether H is the ﬁxed subgroup
of some ﬁnite family of automorphisms, or ﬁnite family of endomorphisms of
F and, in the aﬃrmative case, ﬁnds such a family. We advice the reader that
the provided algorithms are theoretical and far from eﬀective, in the sense
that their complexities will be way too high to think about possible eﬀective
implementations. A natural open question is whether there exist more natural
and eﬃcient algorithms, say polynomial time, for solving such problems.
   Recognizing whether H is the ﬁxed subgroup of a family of automorphisms
is not diﬃcult, because a classical result by McCool already established that
the stabilizer of a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of F is ﬁnitely generated and
computable (as subgroup of Aut(F )), see Theorem 8 below. However, recog-
nizing whether H is the ﬁxed subgroup of a family of endomorphisms is much
trickier, because the stabilizer of H, in general, need not be ﬁnitely generated
as a submonoid of End(F ) (see Example 1 below).
   More precisely, the two algorithms given in this paper take a ﬁnitely gen-
erated subgroup H ≤ F as the input, and compute a basis of its automor-
phism (resp. endomorphism) closure, that is, the smallest subgroup K such
that H ≤ K ≤ F and K = Fix(S) for some S ⊆ Aut F (resp. S ⊆ End F ), see
the precise deﬁnitions below. The main technique used to deal with these
problems is the graphical tool called “fringe of a subgroup”, which allows to
compute the collection of algebraic extensions of a given subgroup H.
   In Section 2, we deﬁne the concepts, and state the results that will be used,
with the corresponding references. Along Section 3, we prove the main result
and give the two announced algorithms. Finally, in Section 4, we collect a list
of related questions and open problems.


                              2. Needed tools
   Definition 1. For any S ⊆ End(F ), let Fix(S) denote the subset con-
sisting of those elements of F which are ﬁxed by every element of S (read
Fix(S) = F for the case where S is empty). Then Fix(S) is a subgroup of F ,
called the ﬁxed subgroup of S.
   A subgroup H of F is called an endo-ﬁxed subgroup of F if H = Fix(S) for
some S ⊆ End(F ). If S can be chosen to lie in Aut(F ), we further say that
H is an auto-ﬁxed subgroup of F .
   A subgroup H of F is called a 1-endo-ﬁxed subgroup of F if H = Fix(φ)
for some φ ∈ End(F ) (here, and throughout, to simplify notation we write
Fix(φ) rather than Fix({φ})). If φ can be chosen to lie in Aut(F ), we further
say that H is a 1-auto-ﬁxed subgroup of F . For example, any maximal cyclic
subgroup of F is 1-auto-ﬁxed, since it is the subgroup ﬁxed by a suitable
inner automorphism. And nonmaximal cyclic subgroups of F are not even
                COMPUTING FIXED CLOSURES IN FREE GROUPS                       177


endo-ﬁxed, because every endomorphism ﬁxing a power of an element must
ﬁx the element itself.           
   Notice that, since Fix(S) = α∈S Fix(α), an auto-ﬁxed (resp. endo-ﬁxed)
subgroup is an intersection of 1-auto-ﬁxed (resp. 1-endo-ﬁxed) subgroups, and
vice-versa. And, clearly, the families of auto-ﬁxed and endo-ﬁxed subgroups
of F are closed under arbitrary intersections.
    A natural question that arises in this context asks about the relation be-
tween the four mentioned families of subgroups of F , namely 1-auto-ﬁxed,
1-endo-ﬁxed, auto-ﬁxed and endo-ﬁxed subgroups. Apart from the obvious
inclusions, the relationship among these families is partially known, though
not completely since there still are interesting questions in this direction that
remain open. For example, it is not known (and conjectured) whether the fam-
ilies of 1-auto-ﬁxed and auto-ﬁxed subgroups (resp. 1-endo-ﬁxed and endo-
ﬁxed subgroups) do coincide; in other words, it is not known whether the
family of 1-auto-ﬁxed (resp. 1-endo-ﬁxed) subgroups is closed under intersec-
tions. As far as we are aware, this is only known to be true when the ambient
rank is n = 2, and when the involved ﬁxed subgroups have maximal rank,
see [10]. In this direction, A. Martino and E. Ventura showed in [10] that
every auto-ﬁxed (resp. endo-ﬁxed) subgroup of F is a free factor of a 1-auto-
ﬁxed (resp. 1-endo-ﬁxed) subgroup of F . However, they also gave an example
of a free factor of a 1-auto-ﬁxed subgroup which is not even endo-ﬁxed.
    We point out that, in the deﬁnitions of auto-ﬁxed and endo-ﬁxed subgroups,
one can always assume that the involved families of morphisms are ﬁnite. This
was proven by A. Martino and E. Ventura in [12, Corollary 4.2], answering
a question previously posed by G. Levitt. So, from now on, a “family” of
endomorphisms will always mean a “ﬁnite family”.
   Proposition 2 (Martino–Ventura, [12]). Let F be a ﬁnitely generated free
group. For every S ⊆ End(F ) there exists a ﬁnite subset S0 ⊆ S with |S0 | ≤
2r(F ), and such that Fix(S0 ) = Fix(S).
   We do not include in this discussion the families of 1-mono-ﬁxed and mono-
ﬁxed subgroups, because they are known to coincide with the families of 1-
auto-ﬁxed and auto-ﬁxed subgroups, respectively (see [11, Theorem 11]).
   On the other hand, it is known that the families of 1-endo-ﬁxed and 1-auto-
ﬁxed subgroups (and the families of endo-ﬁxed and auto-ﬁxed subgroups, as
well) do not coincide: in [11], the authors exhibited the ﬁrst known examples
of 1-endo-ﬁxed subgroups which are not 1-auto-ﬁxed; see also [3] for more
interesting calculations about this phenomena. Hence, determining whether a
given subgroup H is an auto-ﬁxed or an endo-ﬁxed subgroup are two diﬀerent
algorithmic problems (the ﬁrst being much simpler than the second, as will
be seen below).
   The deepest and most important result about 1-auto-ﬁxed subgroups in
the literature was obtained by M. Bestvina and M. Handel in [2], where they
178                                E. VENTURA


developed the theory of train tracks for graphs, and showed that every 1-
auto-ﬁxed subgroup of F has rank at most r(F ), which had previously been
conjectured by G. P. Scott. Soon after the announcement of this result, and
using it, W. Imrich and E. Turner showed, in [5], that any 1-endo-ﬁxed sub-
group of F also has rank at most r(F ). Later, W. Dicks and E. Ventura
in [4], using the techniques of [2], showed that any auto-ﬁxed subgroup of F
has rank at most r(F ); in fact, they proved a stronger result, namely that
any mono-ﬁxed subgroup of F is F -inert (a subgroup H ≤ F is F -inert if
r(H ∩ K) ≤ r(K) for every K ≤ F ). And after this, G. M. Bergman [1], using
the result of [4], showed that any endo-ﬁxed subgroup of F also has rank at
most r(F ) (however, it is not known whether endo-ﬁxed subgroups of F are
necessarily F -inert; it is conjectured to be so in the inertia conjecture, see [12]
and [19]). This brief history is appropriate for our purposes, but is far from
complete; for example, it does not mention the ground-breaking work of S. M.
Gersten, who ﬁrst showed that 1-auto-ﬁxed subgroups are ﬁnitely generated.
   As we mentioned in the Introduction, few algorithmic results are known
about ﬁxed subgroups of free groups. The main one is the computability of
ﬁxed subgroups of automorphisms which, by the moment, it has only theoret-
ical interest because no precise bound on the complexity is known, and one
expects it to be quite high. The corresponding fact for endomorphisms is still
an open problem.
  Theorem 3 (Maslakova, [13]). Let ϕ : F → F be an automorphism of a
ﬁnitely generated free group F . Then, a basis for Fix(ϕ) is computable.
   An interesting notion to study these questions is the notion of “closure” of
a subgroup.
  Definition 4. Let H ≤ F . We denote by AutH (F ) the subgroup of
Aut(F ) consisting of all automorphisms of F which ﬁx H pointwise,
                    AutH (F ) = {ϕ ∈ Aut(F ) | H ≤ Fix(ϕ)},
usually called the stabilizer of H. Analogously, we denote by EndH (F ) the
submonoid of End(F ) consisting of all endomorphisms of F which ﬁx every
element of H. Clearly, AutH (F ) ≤ EndH (F ).
   Now, Aut(−) (F ) is a function from the set of subgroups of F to the set of
subsets of Aut(F ), and Fix(−) is a function in the reverse direction. This pair
of functions form a Galois connection, and their images are called closed sub-
sets (in Aut(F ) and F , respectively). Clearly, Aut(F )-closed subgroups of F
are precisely the auto-ﬁxed subgroups. Mimicking the classical Galois notions,
we deﬁne the auto-closure of H in F , denoted a-Cl F (H), as Fix(AutH (F )),
that is, the smallest auto-ﬁxed subgroup of F containing H.
   Replacing Aut to End everywhere in the previous paragraph, we obtain
another Galois connection, and we similarly deﬁne the endo-closure of H in F ,
denoted e-Cl F (H), as Fix(EndH (F )), i.e., the smallest endo-ﬁxed subgroup
                 COMPUTING FIXED CLOSURES IN FREE GROUPS                        179


of F containing H. Since AutH (F ) ≤ EndH (F ), an obvious relation between
closures is
          e-Cl F (H) = Fix(EndH (F )) ≤ Fix(AutH (F )) = a-Cl F (H).
However, the equality does not hold in general, because of the existence of
1-endo-ﬁxed subgroups which are not auto-ﬁxed.
   Note that, by the results mentioned above, the ranks of a-Cl F (H) and
e-Cl F (H) are always less than or equal to r(F ), even if that of H is not.
   The main goal of this note is to show that, for any ﬁnitely generated H ≤ F
(given by a set of generators), one can algorithmically compute a basis for both
a-Cl F (H) and e-Cl F (H). Using this algorithm, one can immediately decide
whether the given H is auto-ﬁxed (resp. endo-ﬁxed) or not: H is auto-ﬁxed
(resp. endo-ﬁxed) if and only if a-Cl F (H) = H (resp. e-Cl F (H) = H).
   To do this, we need to use the concepts of retract and stable image, and
the graphical technique called “fringe of a subgroup” to compute the set of
algebraic extensions of H. We brieﬂy review now on these two topics.
   A subgroup H ≤ F is called a retract of F (just retract if there is no
risk of confusion) if there exists a homomorphism ρ : F → H which ﬁxes the
elements of H (i.e., such that ρ2 = ρ); such a morphism is called a retraction.
The obvious examples of retracts are the free factors of F , but there are
retracts which are not free factors. Recognizing retracts is algorithmically
possible, as showed in [14, Proposition 4.6] following an argument indicated
by E. Turner, though quite complicated in practice, because it makes use of
Makanin’s algorithm to solve systems of equations in free groups.
   Proposition 5 (Proposition 4.6 in [14]). Let H ≤ F be a ﬁnitely generated
subgroup of F , given by a ﬁnite set of generators. It is algorithmically decidable
whether H is a retract of F and, in the aﬃrmative case, ﬁnd a retraction
ρ : F → H.
   For agiven endomorphism ϕ : F → F , deﬁne the stable image of ϕ as
           ∞
F ϕ∞ = m=1 F ϕm . With a simple argument, W. Imrich and E. Turner
showed in [5] that: (1) F ϕ∞ is a ϕ-invariant subgroup of F ; (2) the restriction
of ϕ to its stable image is always an automorphism; and (3) F ϕ∞ is a retract
of F . This will be used later in order to reduce a certain computation with
endomorphisms, to a similar one with automorphisms.
   Let H ≤ K ≤ F . We say that the extension H ≤ K is algebraic, denoted
H ≤alg K, if H is not contained in any proper free factor of K. The antago-
nistic situation consists of H being a free factor of K, denoted H ≤ﬀ K. It is
not diﬃcult to see (see [14]) that every extension H ≤ K of ﬁnitely generated
(free) subgroups of F can be decomposed, in a unique way, as an algebraic
extension followed by a free extension, namely H ≤alg L ≤ﬀ K (just take L
to be the smallest free factor of K containing H, or the biggest algebraic
extension of H contained in K). The uniqueness refers to the fact that L
180                                E. VENTURA


is completely determined by the original extension H ≤ K; again, mimicking
the classical Galois theory, L is called the algebraic closure of H in K. We
refer the reader to [14] for a detailed development of these ideas, including
an analysis of the similarities and the signiﬁcant diﬀerences with respect to
classical ﬁeld theory.
    The important fact in this story is an old result by M. Takahasi, origi-
nally proven by combinatorial methods in [17] (and reproduced in Section 2.4,
Exercise 8 of [8]). However, the modern graphical techniques developed by
Stalling’s in the 1980s (see [16]) lead to a new, clear, concise and very natural
proof of Takahasi’s theorem, which was discovered independently by E. Ven-
tura in [18], and by I. Kapovich and A. Miasnikov in [6]. S. Margolis, M. Sapir
and P. Weil, also independently, considered the same construction in [9] for a
slightly diﬀerent purposes. See [14] for a uniﬁcation of these three points of
view, written in the language of algebraic extensions. In this setting, Taka-
hasi’s theorem says the following.
   Theorem 6 (Takahasi). Let H ≤ F be a subgroup of a free group F . If H
is ﬁnitely generated, then it has ﬁnitely many algebraic extensions, that is,
                         AE(H) = {K ≤ F | H ≤alg K}
is ﬁnite. Furthermore, the elements in AE(H) are ﬁnitely generated, and bases
of all of them are computable from any given set of generators for H.
   Sketch of proof (See [14, Proposition 3.7] for details). Think F = A |
as the fundamental group of a bouquet of n circles, and then H as the cor-
responding covering X(H), which can be though of as a graph with labels
from A on the edges (this graph is easily computable from any given set of
generators of H). When H is of inﬁnite index in F , the graph X(H) is inﬁ-
nite but, if H is ﬁnitely generated, X(H) consists on a ﬁnite core Γ(H) with
attached inﬁnite trees (each isomorphic to a subtree of the Cayley graph of
F with respect to A). Now, consider an arbitrary extension H ≤ K ≤ F . It
corresponds to another covering X(K), which is in turn covered by X(H).
That is, X(K) is a quotient of X(H) and so, can be obtained from X(H) by
performing several identiﬁcations of vertices and edges. These identiﬁcations
may destroy Γ(H), but some quotient of Γ(H) always remains as a subgraph
of X(K) (in fact, of Γ(K)). If H is ﬁnitely generated then Γ(H) is ﬁnite,
and so has ﬁnitely many quotients, which are computable from Γ(H) (i.e.,
from any given set of generators of H). This gives a computable ﬁnite list of
extensions of H, called the fringe of H, O(H) = {H1 , . . . , Hp }, p ≥ 1. And, by
construction, it is clear that, for every H ≤ K, there exists i = 1, . . . , p such
that H ≤ Hi ≤ﬀ K. This implies that AE(H) ⊆ O(H) and so, we already
have a proof of the ﬁniteness part of Takahasi’s theorem. Unfortunately, the
equality between these two sets is not true in general, as one can possibly ﬁnd
free factor relations between the Hi ’s. But, after a cleaning process (checking
                 COMPUTING FIXED CLOSURES IN FREE GROUPS                         181


for every pair (i, j) whether Hi ≤ﬀ Hj and, in this case, deleting Hj from
the list) one can algorithmically compute AE(H) = {H1 , . . . , Hq }, 1 ≤ q ≤ p.
See [15] for a polynomial time algorithm to check free factorness.            
   Note that the smallest and the biggest of the Hi ’s in O(H) correspond, re-
spectively, to the quotient identifying nothing, which gives H itself, and to the
quotient identifying all vertices down to a single one, which gives A ≤ﬀ F ,
where A ⊆ A is the set of all letters involved in the generators of H. Note also
that the ﬁrst one belongs to AE(H) (since H ≤alg H) and the same happens
for either the second one or a free factor of it. In particular, AE(H) contains
at least H, and a free factor of F (which may coincide). This fact will be used
later.
   Finally, we mention one of the results in [16]. Given two ﬁnitely generated
subgroups H, K ≤ F (by sets of generators, say), one can algorithmically
compute a basis for H ∩ K using the technique of pull-backs of graphs.
   Proposition 7 (Stallings, [16]). Let H, K ≤ F be two ﬁnitely generated
subgroups of a free group F , given by ﬁnite sets of generators. Then, a basis
for H ∩ K is algorithmically computable.

                              3. The algorithms
   Let H ≤ F be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of F , given by a set of gen-
erators. We shall give two algorithms to compute a basis for a-Cl F (H) and
e-Cl F (H), respectively. The basic fact that we use is a classical result due
to J. McCool (see Proposition 5.7 in Chapter I of [7], and the subsequent
paragraph).
   Theorem 8 (McCool, [7]). Let H ≤ F be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of
a (ﬁnitely generated) free group, given by a ﬁnite set of generators. Then the
stabilizer, AutH (F ), of H is also ﬁnitely generated (in fact ﬁnitely presented),
and a ﬁnite set of generators (and relations) is algorithmically computable
from H.
3.1. The automorphism case. By Theorem 8, AutH (F ) is ﬁnitely gener-
ated; furthermore, a list of generators, say AutH (F ) = ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm ≤ Aut(F ),
can be algorithmically found from a set of generators of H. Now it is clear
that
                                     
  a-Cl F (H) = Fix(AutH (F )) =              Fix(ϕ) = Fix(ϕ1 ) ∩ · · · ∩ Fix(ϕm ).
                                  ϕ∈AutH (F )

By Maslakova’s Theorem 3, we can then compute generators for each of the
Fix(ϕi )’s and, using Proposition 7, ﬁnd a basis for their intersection that is
a-Cl F (H). Finally, Proposition 2 ensures us that a certain subset of at most
2r(F ) of those ϕi ’s also makes the job; it only remains to recurrently compute
intersections until ﬁnding such a set. Thus, we have proven the following.
182                                E. VENTURA


   Theorem 9. Let H ≤ F be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of a free group,
given by a ﬁnite set of generators. Then, a basis for the auto-closure a-ClF (H)
of H is algorithmically computable, together with a set of m ≤ 2r(F ) automor-
phisms ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm ∈ Aut(F ), such that a-ClF (H) = Fix(ϕ1 ) ∩ · · · ∩ Fix(ϕm ).
   Corollary 10. Let H ≤ F be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of a free group,
given by a ﬁnite set of generators. Then, it is algorithmically decidable whether
H is auto-ﬁxed and, in the aﬃrmative case, ﬁnd a set of m ≤ 2r(F ) automor-
phisms ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm ∈ Aut(F ), such that H = Fix(ϕ1 ) ∩ · · · ∩ Fix(ϕm ).
   Proof. Apply Theorem 9 to H. If a-Cl F (H) is strictly bigger than H, then
H is not auto-ﬁxed (there are elements outside H which are ﬁxed by every
automorphism of F ﬁxing H). Otherwise, a-Cl F (H) = H and the algorithm
in Theorem 9 also outputs a list of m ≤ 2r(F ) automorphisms ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm ∈
Aut(F ), such that Fix(ϕ1 ) ∩ · · · ∩ Fix(ϕm ) = a-Cl F (H) = H.             

   We don’t play much attention to the complexity of this algorithm be-
cause it seems far from fast. McCool’s algorithm is a brute force search
which is not conceptually complicated, but has strongly exponential complex-
ity. Maslakova’s algorithm is conceptually much more sophisticated, and its
complexity also seems to be quite high. Finally, the algorithm to compute
intersections is both easy and fast.

3.2. The endomorphism case. There is no hope that a similar strategy
could work in general for endomorphisms instead of automorphisms. On one
hand, Maslakova’s theorem makes strong use of train tracks, a machinery
that only works for monomorphisms and deﬁnitely does not work in presence
of nontrivial kernel; in fact, at the time of writing, no algorithm is known to
compute the ﬁxed subgroup of an arbitrary endomorphism of F . On the other
hand, as the following example shows, EndH (F ) is not always ﬁnitely gener-
ated as submonoid of End(F ) and so, there is no hope of having a variation
of McCool’s result for endomorphisms.
    Example 1 (Ciobanu–Dicks, [3]). We reproduce here Example 1.4 of [3]
to show that EndH (F ) is not always ﬁnitely generated as a submonoid of
End(F ), even with H being ﬁnitely generated as a subgroup of F .
    Let F = a, b, c be the free group of rank 3, let d = ba[c2 , b]a−1 (where
[x, y] = xyx−1 y −1 ), and consider the subgroup H = a, d ≤ F . Consider the
endomorphism ψ : F → F given by a → a, b → d, c → 1, and the automor-
phism φ : F → F given by a → a, b → b, c → cb. Straightforward computa-
tions show that dψ = d hence, ψ ∈ EndH (F ). Moreover, φn ψ acts as a → a,
b → d, c → dn and so, we also have φn ψ ∈ EndH (F ) for every n ∈ Z. Now,
Corollary 3.4 from [3] shows that this is precisely the whole stabilizer of H,
                   EndH (F ) = {1, φn ψ | n ∈ Z} = {1} ∪ φ ψ.
                 COMPUTING FIXED CLOSURES IN FREE GROUPS                          183


Again, an easy calculation shows that (φn ψ)·(φm ψ) = φn ψ, for every n, m ∈ Z.
Thus, the monoid EndH (F ) is not ﬁnitely generated.
   Being convinced that the above algorithm for the automorphism case can-
not be adapted to the endomorphism case, a diﬀerent strategy is needed. We
shall use algebraic extensions, Takahasi’s theorem and retractions to reduce
the computation of the endo-closure e-Cl F (H) to ﬁnitely many computations
of auto-closures.
   Theorem 11. Let H ≤ F be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of a free group,
given by a ﬁnite set of generators. Then, a basis for the endo-closure e-ClF (H)
of H is algorithmically computable, together with a set of m ≤ 2r(F ) endomor-
phisms ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm ∈ End(F ), such that e-ClF (H) = Fix(ϕ1 ) ∩ · · · ∩ Fix(ϕm ).
   Proof. Consider the set AE(H) = {H1 , H2 , . . . , Hq } of algebraic extensions
of H, and the subset of those which are retracts of F , say AE ret (H) =
{H1 , . . . , Hr }, 1 ≤ r ≤ q (note that AE ret (H) is not empty because, as we
noted above, AE(H) contains at least a free factor (and so a retract) of F ).
By Theorem 6, we can algorithmically compute q ≥ 1, and a basis for each
H1 , . . . , Hq . Now, using Theorem 5, we can algorithmically decide which of
these Hi ’s are retracts of F , and so compute r ≥ 1, AE ret (H) = {H1 , . . . , Hr },
and retractions ρi : F → Hi , for i = 1, . . . , r. Then, write the generators of H
in terms of the computed bases of each one of these Hi ’s, and apply r times
Theorem 9 to compute, for every i = 1, . . . , r, a basis for a-Cl Hi (H) together
 a collection of (at most 2r(Hi )) automorphisms αi,j ∈ Aut(Hi ) such that
with
  j Fix(αi,j ) = a-Cl Hi (H), and bases for all these
                                                    r
                                                         ﬁxed subgroups Fix(αi,j ).
Finally, use Proposition7 to ﬁnd a basis for i=1 a-Cl Hi (H).
                              r
   Now, we claim that i=1 a-Cl Hi (H) = e-Cl F (H). In fact, we shall prove
this equality under the form
                     
                     r                             
(1)                                   Fix(α) =               Fix(β),
                     i=1 α∈Aut(Hi )              β∈End(F )
                         H≤Fix(α)                H≤Fix(β)

by showing that every intersecting subgroup in one side is also present in the
opposite side (or otherwise a subgroup of it).
   Let β ∈ End(F ) be such that H ≤ Fix(β). Consider the stable image of
β, which is a retract of F , and contains Fix(β) and so H; then, look at the
algebraic closure of H in it,
                            H ≤alg Hi ≤ﬀ F β ∞ ≤ret F.
Since free factors of retracts of F are retracts of F , this Hi is an element of
AE ret (H). Furthermore, the endomorphism β restricts to an automorphism
of F β ∞ which, in turn, restricts to an automorphism α = β|Hi of Hi : the au-
tomorphism β|F β ∞ leaves H invariant (in fact, pointwise ﬁxed) and sends free
184                               E. VENTURA


factors of F β ∞ to free factors of F β ∞ ; hence, the smallest one containing H,
which is Hi , must be sent to itself. And, clearly, H ≤ Fix(α) ≤ Fix(β). This
shows inclusion “≤” in equation (1).
    Now, let Hi ∈ AE ret (H), and let α ∈ Aut(Hi ) with H ≤ Fix(α). Consider
β = ρi αιi ∈ End(F ), where ρi : F → Hi is a retraction, and ιi : Hi → F is
the inclusion map. It is clear that H ≤ Fix(α) = Fix(β) and so, Fix(α) is
also one of the subgroups appearing in the intersection on the right-hand side
of (1). This shows inclusion “≥” in equation (1) and completes the proof of
the claim.
    Thus, the algorithm described in the ﬁrst paragraph of this proof, certainly
computes a basis for e-Cl F (H) (together with some side information, namely
the retractions ρi , the collection of automorphisms αi,j ∈ Aut(Hi ), and bases
for their ﬁxed subgroups Fix(αi,j )). To conclude, it only remains to explicitly
construct a list of at most 2r(F ) endomorphisms of F whose ﬁxed set is
exactly e-Cl F (H). This is easy from the previous paragraph: the collection
of endomorphisms βi,j = ρi αi,j ιi ∈ End(F ) satisfy Fix(βi,j ) = Fix(αi,j ) and
so,
                                       
            Fix(βi,j ) =        Fix(αi,j ) = a-Cl Hi (H) = e-Cl F (H).
           i,j           i   j                i

It could happen that the computed set, {βi,j | i, j}, of endomorphisms of F
exceeded in number the maximum wanted quantity of 2r(F ). In this case,
Proposition 2 ensures us that a certain subset of cardinal at most 2r(F ) makes
the job, too. Since, as a side product of our computation, we also have a basis
of each Fix(βi,j ) = Fix(αi,j ), it only remains to recurrently compute inter-
sections until ﬁnding the desired set (knowing it exists). This concludes the
proof.                                                                       

   Corollary 12. Let H ≤ F be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of a free group,
given by a ﬁnite set of generators. Then, it is algorithmically decidable whether
H is endo-ﬁxed and, in the aﬃrmative case, ﬁnd a set of m ≤ 2r(F ) endo-
morphisms ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm ∈ End(F ) such that H = Fix(ϕ1 ) ∩ · · · ∩ Fix(ϕm ).

                             4. Open problems
   In this last section, we collect a list of interesting questions and open prob-
lems in this subject.
      Problem 1. Find an algorithm to compute Fix(ϕ) for a given ϕ ∈ End(F ).
   Problem 2. Find an algorithm to determine whether a given ﬁnitely gen-
erated subgroup H ≤ F is 1-auto-ﬁxed, or 1-endo-ﬁxed.
  Problem 3. Do the families of auto-ﬁxed and 1-auto-ﬁxed subgroups of
F coincide? And those of 1-endo-ﬁxed and endo-ﬁxed subgroups?
                  COMPUTING FIXED CLOSURES IN FREE GROUPS                              185


   Problem 4. Find eﬀective, say polynomial time, algorithms to compute
the ﬁx subgroup of a given endomorphism, and to determine whether a given
ﬁnitely generated subgroup H of F is 1-auto-ﬁxed, or 1-endo-ﬁxed, or auto-
ﬁxed, or endo-ﬁxed.
   Problem 5. Are endo-ﬁxed subgroups of F F -inert?
   Problem 6. Find an algorithm to decide whether a given subgroup H ≤ F
is F -inert.

                                     References
 [1] G. M. Bergman, Supports of derivarions, free factorizations and ranks of ﬁxed sub-
     groups in free groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 351 (1999), 1531–1550. MR 1458296
 [2] M. Bestvina and M. Handel, Train tracks and automorphisms of free groups, Ann. of
     Math. (2) 135 (1992), 1–51. MR 1147956
 [3] L. Ciobanu and W. Dicks, Two examples in the Galois theory of free groups, J. Algebra
     305 (2006), 540–547. MR 2264142
 [4] W. Dicks and E. Ventura, The group ﬁxed by a family of injective endomorphism of a
     free group, Contemp. Math. 195 (1996), 1–81. MR 1385923
 [5] W. Imrich and E. C. Turner, Endomorphisms of free groups and their ﬁxed points,
     Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 105 (1989), 421–422. MR 0985677
 [6] I. Kapovich and A. Miasnikov, Stallings foldings and subgroups of free groups, J.
     Algebra 248 (2002), 608–668. MR 1882114
 [7] R. Lyndon and P. Schupp, Combinatorial group theory, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977.
     MR 0577064
 [8] W. Magnus, A. Karrass and D. Solitar, Combinatorial group theory, Interscience, New
     York, 1966. MR 207802
 [9] S. Margolis, M. Sapir and P. Weil, Closed subgroups in pro-V topologies and the exten-
     sion problems for inverse automata, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 11 (2001), 405–445.
     MR 1850210
[10] A. Martino and E. Ventura, On automorphism-ﬁxed subgroups of a free group, J.
     Algebra 230 (2000), 596–607. MR 1775805
[11] A. Martino and E. Ventura, Examples of retracts in free groups that are not the ﬁxed
     subgroup of any automorphism, J. Algebra 269 (2003), 735–747. MR 2015863
[12] A. Martino and E. Ventura, Fixed subgroups are compressed in free groups, Comm.
     Algebra 32 (2004), 3921–3935. MR 2097438
[13] O. S. Maslakova, The ﬁxed point group of a free group automorphism, Algebra Logika
     42 (2003), 422–472, 510–511; english translation at Algebra Logic 42 (2003), 237–265.
     MR 2017513
[14] A. Miasnikov, E. Ventura and P. Weil, Algebraic extensions in free groups, Geometric
     group theory: Geneva and Barcelona Conferences, Trends in Mathematics, Birkhaüser,
     Basel, 2007, pp. 225–253. MR 2395796
[15] A. Roig, E. Ventura and P. Weil, On the complexity of the Whitehead minimization
     problem, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 17 (2007), 1611–1634. MR 2378055
[16] J. R. Stallings, Topology of ﬁnite graphs, Invent. Math. 71 (1983), 551–565.
     MR 0695906
[17] M. Takahasi, Note on chain conditions in free groups, Osaka Math. J. 3 (1951), 221–
     225. MR 0046362
[18] E. Ventura, On ﬁxed subgroups of maximal rank, Comm. Algebra 25 (1997), 3361–
     3375. MR 1465119
186                                   E. VENTURA


[19] E. Ventura, Fixed subgroups in free groups: A survey, Contemp. Math. 296 (2002),
     231–255. MR 1922276
    Enric Ventura, Departament de Matemàtica Aplicada III, Universitat Poli-
tècnica de Catalunya, Manresa, Barcelona, Catalonia
      E-mail address: enric.ventura@upc.edu
