                                                ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI
                                                               SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )

                                                                                   MIKHAIL ERSHOV
arXiv:2601.01377v1 [math.GR] 4 Jan 2026




                                                  Abstract. Let Fn be the free group of rank n, and let ρab : Aut(Fn ) → GLn (Z) be the
                                                  map induced by the natural projection Fn → Zn . It is a long-standing open problem
                                                  whether the subgroup of IA-automorphisms IAn = Ker ρab is finitely presented for n ≥ 4.
                                                  In this paper we establish finite presentability of certain infinite index subgroups of
                                                  Aut(Fn ) containing IAn . In the terminology of Putman, these subgroups are natural
                                                  analogues of partial Torelli subgroups of mapping class groups.




                                                                                  1. Introduction
                                             Given n ≥ 2, let Fn be the free group of rank n and Aut(Fn ) its automorphism group.
                                          We begin the paper with a brief overview of the past work on finite presentability of
                                          Aut(Fn ) and some of its subgroups.
                                          Finite presentability of Aut(Fn ) and some of its subgroups. Finite generation of
                                          Aut(Fn ) was established by Nielsen in 1921 [Ni21], and shortly afterwards, Nielsen proved
                                          that Aut(Fn ) is finitely presented [Ni24]. While the proof of finite generation in [Ni21]
                                          and the description of the finite presentation in [Ni24] were elementary, justification of
                                          this presentation used sophisticated geometric techniques. Whitehead [Wh36] gave an
                                          algorithm which determines whether two given n-tuples of elements of Fn lie in the same
                                          Aut(Fn )-orbit, using what is now known as the peak reduction lemma. This was another
                                          fundamental result about Aut(Fn ) with a simple algebraic statement proved by a non-
                                          algebraic method.
                                             Rapaport [Ra58] gave an algebraic proof of Whitehead’s peak reduction lemma, which
                                          was later simplified by Higgins and Lyndon [HL74]. McCool [Mc74a] used a variation of the
                                          results from [HL74] to find another presentation for Aut(Fn ), and then used it in [Mc74b] to
                                          give another (this time purely algebraic) proof of the correctness of Nielsen’s presentation
                                          from [Ni24]. Later, using similar peak-reduction techniques, McCool [Mc75] established
                                          finite presentability of several classes of subgroups of Aut(Fn ), including stabilizers of
                                          finite subsets as well as algebraic mapping class groups. More recently, Day generalized
                                          McCool’s finite presentability results to the automorphism groups of the right-angled Artin
                                          groups [D09] and their corresponding subgroups [D14].
                                          The main result. One prominent subgroup of Aut(Fn ) whose presentability does not
                                          seem to be tractable by McCool’s method (or its variations) is IAn , called the subgroup
                                          of IA-automorphisms or the Torelli subgroup. It is defined as the kernel of the map
                                          ρab : Aut(Fn ) → Aut(Zn ) = GLn (Z) induced by the natural projection Fn → Zn . Mag-
                                          nus [Ma35] proved that IAn is finitely generated and found a simple finite generating

                                             2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 20F05, 20F65; Secondary 20F06, 20F28, 57M07.
                                             Key words and phrases. automorphisms of free groups, Torelli subgroup, BNSR invariants, van Kampen
                                          diagram.
                                                                                            1
2                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

set. This result immediately implies that IA2 is free of rank 2 and thus trivially finitely
presented. Krstic and McCool [KM97] proved that IA3 is not finitely presented, and the
question whether IAn is finitely presented for n ≥ 4 remains open.
   We note that if for some n the Torelli group IAn is finitely presented, then so is any
subgroup of the form ρ−1  ab (P ) where P is a finitely presented subgroup of GLn (Z). On
the other hand, to the best of our knowledge, the groups of this form were only known to
be finitely presented when P has finite index in GLn (Z) (in which case the result follows
automatically from finite presentability of Aut(Fn )). The goal of this paper is to establish
finite presentability for a natural family of groups of the form ρ−1
                                                                   ab (P ) with P of infinite
index in GLn (Z) (Theorem 1.1 below). By analogy with [Pu23], we will call these groups
partial Torelli subgroups.
Partial Torelli subgroups. Given integers 1 ≤ d ≤ n, let Coln,d (resp. Rown,d ) denote
the subgroup of GLn (Z) consisting of all matrices whose first d columns (resp. rows)
coincide with those of the identity matrix. Let IACn,d (resp. IARn,d ) denote the preimage
of Coln,d (resp. Rown,d ) under ρab : Aut(Fn ) → GLn (Z). Thus,
                     IAn = IACn,n ⊆ IACn,n−1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ IACn,0 = Aut(Fn )
and similarly with IACn,d replaced by IARn,d .
Theorem 1.1. The groups IACn,d and IARn,d are finitely presented when n ≥ d + 115.
Moreover, the groups IACn,1 and IARn,1 are finitely presented for all n ≥ 26.
Remark. The question whether IARn,1 is finitely presented for n ≥ 4 was asked by
Krstic and McCool [KM97, Problem 3]. It was proved in [KM97] that IAR3,1 is not
finitely presented.
Motivation: BNSR invariants. Our proof of Theorem 1.1 is inspired by the work of
Renz on the second BNSR invariant. Given a finitely generated group G, its BNS invariant
Σ(G) = Σ1 (G) (which is also the first BNSR invariant) was introduced in the celebrated
paper of Bieri, W. Neumann and Strebel [BNS87]. Among other things, it was proved
in [BNS87] that Σ(G) completely determines which coabelian subgroups of G are finitely
generated (we call a subgroup N of G coabelian if N is normal and G/N is abelian).
This result is often called the BNS criterion. Higher order analogues of Σ(G), now called
BNSR invariants, were introduced and studied in the Ph.D. thesis of Renz [Re88] (homo-
topical BNSR invariants) and in the paper of Bieri and Renz [BR88] (homological BNSR
invariants). In particular, Renz [Re88] proved that the second homotopical BNSR invari-
ant Σ2 (G), which can be associated to any finitely presented group G, determines which
coabelian subgroups of G are finitely presented (this result will be referred to as Renz’s
criterion).
   In the proofs of both BNS criterion and Renz’s criterion, geometry of the Cayley graph
of G/N plays the key role in determining when a coabelian subgroup N of G is finitely
generated (resp. finitely presented). A. Putman1 suggested that this geometric approach
may be applicable beyond the coabelian setting, and in this paper we will implement this
idea in the case where G = SAut(Fn ) and N = IARn,d ∩G or IACn,d ∩G (with n and d as in
Theorem 1.1). Here SAut(Fn ) is the subgroup of “orientation-preserving” automorphisms
of Fn defined by SAut(Fn ) = ρ−1ab (SLn (Z)) (it has index 2 in Aut(Fn )). Note that in these

    1private communication
      ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                3

cases N is not normal in G, so instead of the Cayley graph we will deal with the Schreier
graph of G/N .
   The reason we will be working with SAut(Fn ) instead of Aut(Fn ) is that SAut(Fn ) has
a particularly nice Steinberg-type presentation found by Gersten [Ge84], which is very
similar to the standard presentation of SLn (Z) – see § 2.3.
About the proof of Theorem 1.1. We will prove Theorem 1.1 using a general criterion
in terms of van Kampen diagrams:
Proposition 1.2. Let G = ⟨X|R⟩ be a finitely presented group, H a finitely generated
subgroup of G and ρ : G → G/H the natural projection. Let A ⊆ G/H be a finite subset
such that ρ−1 (A) is connected in the Cayley graph Cay(G, X), and suppose that there
exists a finite subset B of G/H with the following property:
   (*) For any simple closed path γ in Cay(G, X) all of whose vertices lie in ρ−1 (A)
       there exists a disk van Kampen diagram Ω relative to (X, R) such that ∂Ω = γ (as
       defined below) and all vertices of Ω lie in ρ−1 (B).
Then H is finitely presented.
   In the statement of Proposition 1.2 we assume that the vertices of Ω are labeled by
elements of G (and as usual the edges of Ω are labeled by elements of X) such that
l(w) = l(e)l(v) whenever e is an edge from v to w. If we fix some vertex v of Ω and some
g ∈ G, there exists a unique such vertex labeling with l(v) = g. The equality ∂Ω = γ
means that there exists a vertex v of ∂Ω and a vertex g ∈ G such that l(v) = g and
l(∂Ω) = l(γ) where l(∂Ω) and l(γ) are the labels of the paths Ω and γ read starting from
v and g, respectively.
Remark. A finite subset A ⊆ G/H such that ρ−1 (A) is connected always exists since H
is finitely generated (see [Str12, EF23]).
   Proposition 1.2 is a special case of a well-known criterion of Brown [Br87, Theorem 3.2].
Although Proposition 1.2 cannot be formally deduced from the statement of [Br87, Theo-
rem 3.2], it immediately follows from its proof (see Theorem 2.5). In § 2 we will also pro-
vide a self-contained and purely group-theoretic proof of Proposition 1.2 (we will slightly
reformulate it using additional terminology introduced at the beginning of § 2 – see Propo-
sition 2.3).
   The proof of the aforementioned Renz’s criterion in [Re88] uses a special case of Propo-
sition 1.2 where condition (*) is assumed to hold for B = A. In this case one can use the
basic fact that a group H is finitely presented if it acts freely on a simply-connected CW-
complex C such that the quotient C/H has finite 2-skeleton (see, e.g., [Br84, Theorem 4]).
   Let us now describe a general method for verifying condition (*) in Proposition 1.2 for a
specific pair (G, H). This method was introduced in [Re88] in a more specialized setting.
Suppose that we have a norm function N : G/H → Z0 for some well-ordered set Z0 with
the property that for all z ∈ G/H the set {y ∈ G/H : N (y) ≤ N (z)} is finite (in particular,
N has finite fibers). Since B can always be enlarged without violating (*), we can assume
that B contains {z ∈ G/H : N (z) ≤ N (a) for some a ∈ A}. By van Kampen’s lemma, for
any simple closed path γ as in (*) there exists some disk van Kampen diagram Ω relative
to (X, R) such that ∂Ω = γ. Then Ω either satisfies the conclusion of (*) or contains
an interior vertex v of maximal norm. In the latter case our goal is to replace Ω by a
modified diagram Ω′ where v is eliminated and every new vertex w satisfies N (w) < N (v).
4                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

If such Ω′ can always be constructed, an easy argument shows that after finitely many
modifications we will obtain a diagram satisfying (*).
   Renz [Re88] dealt with this problem in the special case where H is normal in G and
G/H is free abelian. In this case the norm function N is just the Euclidean norm on
G/H (relative to a fixed basis of G/H), and there exists a fairly general algorithm for
constructing the modified diagram Ω′ (of course, the algorithm only works if the group H
is actually finitely presented).
   The norm functions in this paper will be more involved and defined in a more ad hoc
way. Likewise, at each step we will need to construct Ω′ from Ω in several substeps, and
the algorithm will depend on the boundary labels of the 2-cells containing v (the chosen
vertex of maximal norm).
   The method we just described can also be adequately called peak reduction (at each
step our goal is to remove the chosen “peak” vertex v), but the setting is different from
those of Whitehead’s lemma and its generalizations in McCool’s papers [Mc74a, Mc75].
In those papers one starts with a group G defined by a faithful action on some set Ω
and then proves finite presentability of G directly using this action. In our case we start
with a group G with a known finite presentation (X, R) and prove finite presentability
of a subgroup H of G using its action on the Cayley complex of G corresponding to the
presentation (X, R).
Some related questions. Given a group G, one has the following implications
 G is finitely presented ⇒ G has type (FP2 ) ⇒ rk H2 (G, Z) < ∞ ⇒ dim H2 (G, Q) < ∞.
   In the case G = IAn , n ≥ 4, it is not known whether any of the above properties hold.
In this paper we prove finite presentability for the groups IARn,d and IACn,d , n ≥ d + 115,
and it is natural to ask if similar ideas could be used to establish some weak form of finite
presentability from the above list for a certain group H lying strictly between IARn,d
or IACn,d and IAn , with the most ambitious case being H = IAn . In [DP17], Day and
Putman proved that for n ≥ 6, the second homology H2 (IAn , Z) is finitely generated as a
GLn (Z)-module and moreover, IAn is “finitely presented with respect to the conjugation
action of Aut(Fn )” (in a suitable sense). It would be interesting to see if these results
could be used to strengthen Theorem 1.1.
   Another challenge is to adapt the proofs from this paper to the case of mapping class
groups. Given non-negative integers g and b, let Σg,b be an orientable surface of genus
g with b boundary components and let Modg,b = Mod(Σg,b ) be its mapping class group.
The subgroup Ig,b consisting of elements of Modg,b which act trivially on H1 (Σg,b , Z) is
called the Torelli subgroup of Modg,b , and in the cases b = 0, 1 there are many similarities
between the groups Modg,b (resp. Ig,b ) and Aut(Fn ) (resp. IAn ). In [Pu23], Putman
considered natural counterparts of IARn,d and IACn,d inside Modg,b , b ≥ 1, called partial
Torelli subgroups, and defined as follows. Let us think of Σg,b as a sphere with g handles
attached and b disks removed and enumerate the handles arbitrarily. For 1 ≤ d ≤ g define
the partial Torelli subgroup Ig,b;d to be the subgroup of Modg,b consisting of mapping
classes which acts trivially on the part of H1 (Σg,b , Z) supported on the first d handles
(thus, Modg,b = Ig,b;0 ⊇ Ig,b;1 ⊇ · · · ⊇ Ig,b;g = Ig,b ). Putman [Pu23] established various
homological stability results for these groups. To the best of our knowledge, it is currently
an open problem whether the groups Ig,b;d are finitely presented, apart from the case
d = 0.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                        5

   Several amazing breakthroughs on closely related questions about Modg,b have occured
in the past two years. First, Minahan [Mi23b] proved that the Torelli group Ig,b , b ≤ 1,
has finite dimensional second rational homology for g ≥ 51. In [MP25a], Minahan and
Putman extended this theorem to all g ≥ 6 and moreover gave an explicit description of
H2 (Ig,b , Q) as a Sp2g (Z)-module; see also [Mi23a], [MP25b] and [MP25c] for important
related results, some of which are used in [MP25a]. We do not know if the techniques
from these papers could be applicable to the groups IAn or any of the groups IARn,d and
IACn,d .
Outline of the paper. The paper is organized as follows. In § 2 we will introduce
most of our terminology involving van Kampen diagrams, some of which is non-standard,
and describe in detail our general method for proving finite presentability. We will also
introduce Gersten’s presentation for SAut(Fn ) and its universal central extension which
will provide a starting point for proving finite presentability of IARn,d and IACn,d . In § 3
and § 4 we will prove finite presentability for the groups IARn,1 and IACn,1 , respectively.
Since the proofs in these two cases will follow the same general outline, in § 4 we will
concentrate on parts of the proof for IACn,1 that require non-trivial modifications. Finally,
in § 5, we will prove Theorem 1.1 in the general case. The proof will be essentially
inductive, although we are unable to formally use induction on d. More precisely, in order
to prove Theorem 1.1 for IARn,d and IACn,d it will not be enough to assume the result for
smaller values of d. Instead, we will need to imitate certain steps of the proof for d = 1,
but in a more general setting.
Acknowledgments. I am extremely grateful to Andrew Putman for explaining the proof
of the BNS criterion from [Str12] and sharing his ideas about possible generalizations
during his visit to the University of Virginia in Fall 2017. This project would have never
started without that conversation. I would also like to thank Matthew Day, Andrei Jaikin,
Daniel Minahan and Dmitriy Sonkin for useful discussions.

                                        2. Preliminaries
Cayley and Schreier graphs and Schreier sets. In this paper we will adopt a slightly
unusual convention and work with left Cayley graphs instead of more commonly used right
Cayley graphs. We will also view Cayley graphs as labeled oriented graphs. Thus if G is
a group and S is its generating set, we define Cay(G, S) to be the graph whose vertex set
is G and where for each g ∈ G and s ∈ S there is an oriented edge from g to sg labeled
by s. Similarly, one defines the Schreier graph Sch(Z, S) where Z is any left G-set.
   To be consistent with this convention we define a subset A of a free group F (X) to be
Schreier if for every a ∈ A, every suffix of a also lies in A (in the usual definition prefixes
are used instead of suffixes). Geometrically this means that all vertices on the unique path
in Cay(F (X), X) form 1 to a ∈ A must lie in A.

2.1. Van Kampen diagrams. We start with the definition of a van Kampen diagram.
Let X be a finite alphabet and let Ω be a finite connected oriented plane graph whose
edges are labeled by elements of X. We will refer to the bounded connected components
of R2 \ Ω as cells of Ω. Given a cell F, let e1 , . . . , ek be its edges listed as we traverse ∂F ,
the boundary of F, starting from some vertex, either clockwise or counterclockwise. We
                                                                   1
                                                                     l(ei )εi where l(ei ) is the label
                                                                  Q
define l(∂F), the boundary label of ∂F , to be the word
                                                                 i=k
6                                    MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                                               b
                                           •           •

                                       a           c

                                           •           •
                                               d


                                       Figure 1.

of ei and εi = 1 or −1 depending on whether ei is traversed in the positive or negative
direction (note that l(∂F ) is only defined up to cyclic shifts and inverses).
Definition 2.1. Fix a presentation (X, R) of a group G where each r ∈ R is cyclically
reduced, and let Ω be as above.
   (1) Suppose that for every cell F of Ω, its boundary label is equal to a cyclic shift of
       some element of R ∪ R−1 . Then Ω is called a van Kampen diagram over (X, R).
   (2) Let U be the unique unbounded connected component of R2 \ Ω. By abuse of
       notation we define the boundary ∂Ω to be ∂U, and we define its label l(∂Ω) in the
       same way as labels for the cells of Ω.
   (3) We say that Ω is a disk diagram if R2 \ U is homeomorphic to a (closed) disk.
Remark. Note that the boundary label of a cell in a van Kampen diagram should be
read “from right to left” – for instance, the boundary label of the cell shown in Figure 1
is dcba, not abcd. This is because we are working with left Cayley graphs.

    The following basic result is known as van Kampen’s Lemma:
Lemma 2.2 (van Kampen’s Lemma). Let (X, R) be a presentation of a group G, with
each r ∈ R cyclically reduced. Let f ∈ F (X). Then f = 1 in G if and only if there exists
a van Kampen diagram Ω over (X, R) whose boundary label is f .
   Contrary to a common convention, we do not allow 0-edges (edges labeled by the trivial
element 1). This means that the diagram Ω in Lemma 2.2 is not necessarily a disk diagram;
in general it consists of several disk subdiagrams connected by (possibly degenerate) arcs.
   In the definition of a van Kampen diagram only edges (not vertices) come with labels.
However the ‘if’ direction of Lemma 2.2 easily implies that for any van Kampen diagram
Ω, one can label the vertices by elements of G such that whenever v and w are vertices
and e is an edge from v to w we have l(w) = l(e)l(v); in fact, such a labeling is uniquely
determined by the label of one vertex (which can be chosen arbitrarily). More generally,
if Z is any left G-set, one can label the vertices of Ω by elements of Z such that if e is
an edge from v to w, then l(w) = l(e).l(v). In this case we will say that Ω is a Z-labeled
diagram over (X, R).
   We will also use the following shortcut notation. Suppose that Z = G/H for some
subgroup H and ρ : G → Z the natural projection. If Ω is a Z-labeled diagram over
(X, R) and γ is a simple closed path in Cay(G, X), we will write ∂Ω = [γ]Z if there exists
a vertex v of ∂Ω and a vertex g ∈ G such that l(v) = ρ(g) and l(∂Ω) = l(γ) where the
path labels l(∂Ω) and l(γ) are read starting from v and g, respectively.
   We will now give a self-contained proof of Proposition 1.2, which we slightly rephrase
below (see Proposition 2.3) using vertex labels we have just introduced.
      ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                7

Proposition 2.3. Let G = ⟨X|R⟩ be a finitely presented group, with R cyclically reduced.
Let H be a subgroup of G. Set Z = G/H, and let ρ : G → Z be the natural projection. Let
A be a finite subset of Z such that ρ−1 (A) is connected in the Cayley graph Cay(G, X),
and suppose that there exists a finite subset B of Z with the following property:
    (*) For any simple closed path γ in Cay(G, X) all of whose vertices lie in ρ−1 (A) there
        exists a Z-labeled van Kampen diagram Ω relative to (X, R) such that ∂Ω = [γ]Z
        and all vertices of Ω lie in B.
Then H is finitely presented.
Proof. First we reduce to the case 1 ∈ ρ−1 (A). Indeed, suppose that the hypotheses of
Proposition 2.3 hold for some quadruple (G, H, A, B), and choose finite sets A,
                                                                             e B e ∈ G such
       −1                  −1
that ρ (A) = AH and ρ (B) = BH. The group G acts on the set of G-labeled van Kam-
                  e                 e
pen diagrams by right multiplication, and for any g ∈ G we have AH e = (Ag)(g
                                                                           e      −1 Hg)g −1

and BHe    = (Bg)(g
                 e    −1 Hg)g −1 . Thus, the hypotheses of Proposition 2.3 also hold for

(G, g −1 Hg, ρg (Ag),
                  e ρg (Bg))
                         e    where ρg is the projection onto G/(g −1 Hg). Thus, for any
g ∈ G we can replace H by g −1 Hg and A by ρg (Ag),e    and choosing any g ∈ A  e−1 ensures
that ρg (1) ∈ ρg (Ag).
                   e
   Thus, from now on we assume that 1 ∈ ρ−1 (A). We will first prove that H has a finite
generating set with a nice property (see Claim 2.4 below). Let N be the normal closure
of R in F (X) (so that G = F/N ), and let FH be the unique subgroup of F (X) such that
H = FH /N . Denote by θ the natural projection from F (X) to Z.
Claim 2.4. There exists a finite subset S of FH such that
   (a) the image of S in G generates H;
   (b) S is contained in some free generating set XH of FH ;
   (c) every suffix of every element of S ∪ S −1 lies in θ−1 (A).
Proof. Recall that by our assumption ρ−1 (A) is connected in Cay(G, X) and hence A is
connected in the Schreier graph Sch(Z, X) (note that the latter property is much weaker,
and the original assumption will be used again later in the proof).
   Choose any maximal tree TA inside the subgraph of Sch(Z, X) spanned by A (so that
A is the set of vertices of TA ). For every a ∈ A let γa be the unique path inside TA from
ρ(1) to a (recall that ρ(1) ∈ A), and let ta be the unique element of F (X) corresponding
to γa (that is, ta is the product of the edge labels of γa ). Let TA = {ta : a ∈ A}. By
construction, θ : F (X) → Z = G/H maps TA bijectively onto A and TA is a Schreier
subset (that is, every suffix of an element of TA lies in TA ).
   Given u ∈ θ−1 (A), let u be the unique element of TA such that θ(u) = θ(u). Let S be
                                                      −1
the set of all non-identity elements of the form xt xt where t ∈ TA and x ∈ X are such
that xt ∈ θ−1 (A) as well. We claim that S has the required properties.
   First, S lies in FH since θ(u) = θ(v) if and only if u−1 v ∈ FH for u, v ∈ F (X). Since
ρ−1 (A) is connected in Cay(G, X) (this time we need the full power of this assumption),
by [EF23, Theorem 2.12] S satisfies (a).
   Since TA is a Schreier subset, it is contained inside some Schreier transversal T , and by
                                        −1
Schreier’s theorem the set XH = {xt xt : t ∈ T, x ∈ X} \ {1} (which clearly contains S)
freely generates FH . This proves (b).
                                                                      −1
  Finally, we prove (c). Take any s ∈ S, so by definition s = xt xt for some t ∈ TA
and x ∈ X such that θ(xt) ∈ A as well. Let q be any suffix of s, so that s = pq for some
8                                         MIKHAIL ERSHOV

                                                                 −1
p ∈ F (X) and the word pq is reduced. Since s = xt xt, either q is a suffix of xt or p is
                −1
a prefix of xt . In the former case either q = xt, so that θ(q) ∈ A by assumption, or q
is a suffix of t, in which case θ(q) ∈ A since t ∈ TA and TA is Schreier. Suppose now that
                     −1
p is a prefix of xt . Then p−1 is a suffix of xt ∈ TA , so θ(p−1 ) ∈ A. But pq ∈ H, so
θ(q) = qH = p−1 H = θ(p−1 ) ∈ A.
   Thus, we proved that θ(q) ∈ A for every suffix q of s. Further, the argument in the last
case shows that θ(p−1 ) ∈ A for every prefix p of s. Since the inverses of the prefixes of s
are precisely the suffixes of s−1 , we showed that θ(q) ∈ A for every suffix q of s−1 , which
completes the proof of (c).                                                                □
   We proceed with the proof of Proposition 2.3. Let S and XH be as in Claim 2.4.
   Take any word r ∈ F (S) which represents 1 in G, and let r′ ∈ F (X) be the word
obtained from r by expressing each s ∈ S in terms of X ∪ X −1 . Let δ be the closed (but
not necessarily simple) path in Cay(G, X) starting at 1 and representing r′ .
   By condition (c) in Claim 2.4, every vertex of δ lies in ρ−1 (A). Hence by condition (*) in
Proposition 2.3, for any simple closed subpath γ of δ there exists a Z-labeled disk diagram
Ωγ with ∂Ωγ = [γ]Z whose vertices lie in B. By the standard correspondence between
                                                     k
disk diagrams and relators this means that r′ =         wi−1 ri±1 wi for some wi ∈ θ−1 (B) and
                                                    Q
                                                           i=1
ri ∈ R.
   Choose a finite subset V of F (X) such that θ(V ) = B, and for each 1 ≤ i ≤ k let
vi ∈ V be such that θ(wi ) = θ(vi ) . Then wi−1 vi represents an element of H in G, that is,
wi−1 vi ∈ F (XH ). Hence
                         k
                         Y                      k
                                                Y
                    ′
                   r =         wi−1 ri±1 wi =     (wi−1 vi )(vi−1 ri±1 vi )(wi−1 vi )−1
                         i=1                    i=1

lies in the closure of the finite set RV = {r ∈ R, v ∈ V } in the group F     H = F (XH ).
   Recall that N denotes the kernel of the natural projection F (X) → G. We just showed
that N ∩ F (S) lies in the normal closure of RV in F (XH ). Thus, the embedding F (S) →
F (XH ) induces a map from F (S)/N ∩ F (S) to H ∗ = ⟨XH |RV ⟩. Since S generates H,
F (S)/N ∩ F (S) is naturally isomorphic to H.
   Now define the groups H ′ and H ′′ as follows. For each u ∈ XH \S choose any su ∈ F (S)
such that u = su in G. Let H ′ be the group obtained from H ∗ by imposing the relations
u = su for all u ∈ XH \ S, and let H ′′ be the group obtained from H ′ by removing all the
generators from XH \ S together with relations of the form u = su with u ∈ XH \ S and
replacing each u by su in relations from RV . By a standard argument H ′′ is isomorphic
to H ′ , and by construction H ′′ is finitely presented.
   Since H ′ is generated by the image of XH and every defining relation of H ′ holds in H,
there is a well-defined projection α3 : H ′ → H. Now consider the following sequence of
maps:
                               α1                        α2      α3
                           H −→    F (S)/N ∩ F (S) −→       H ′ −→  H.
By construction each αi is surjective. On the other hand, it is straightforward to check
that the composition α1 ◦α2 ◦α3 is the identity map on H, so each αi must also be injective
and hence an isomorphism. Thus H ∼       = H′ ∼= H ′′ , so H is finitely presented.        □
   Let us now explain why Proposition 2.3 also follows from a criterion of Brown. The
following result can be deduced from the proof of [Br87, Theorem 3.2]:
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                  9

Theorem 2.5. Suppose that a group H has a cellular action on a CW-complex C such that
the vertex stabilizers are finitely presented and the edge stabilizers are finitely generated.
Assume that C1 ⊆ C2 are connected H-invariant subcomplexes of C such that
     (i) the action of H on C2 (and hence on C1 ) is cocompact;
    (ii) the induced map π1 (C1 ) → π1 (C2 ) is trivial.
Then H is finitely presented.
Another proof of Proposition 2.3. Define C = Cay(G; X, R) to be the Cayley complex
associated to the presentation (X, R), and let C1 (resp. C2 ) be the full subcomplexes
spanned by all g ∈ ρ−1 (A) (resp. all g ∈ ρ−1 (B)).
   The group H acts on C by right multiplication. This action is cellular and free on
vertices and thus has trivial vertex stabilizers and finite edge stabilizers. Since ρ(gh) = ρ(g)
for all g ∈ G and h ∈ H, both C1 and C2 are H-invariant. The subcomplex C1 is connected
by the hypotheses of Proposition 2.3, and we can make C2 connected by enlarging B if
needed (pick a ball in Cay(G, X) centered at 1 whose image in G/H contains A and let B
be the image of that ball in G/H). The action of H on C2 is cocompact since B is finite.
   Finally, π1 (C1 ) is generated by closed paths in the Cay(G, X) which stay in C1 . Con-
dition (*) in Proposition 2.3 implies that any such path is homotopic in C2 to the trivial
path, so the induced map π1 (C1 ) → π1 (C2 ) is trivial. Thus, we verified all hypotheses of
Theorem 2.5 and hence H is finitely presented.                                                □
  We finish this subsection with two important definitions.
Super-reduced presentations.
Definition 2.6. Let (X, R) be a presentation of a group G. We will say that r ∈ R is
super-reduced if it is cyclically reduced and any non-trivial proper subword of r represents
a non-trivial element of G. We will say that (X, R) is super-reduced if every r ∈ R is
super-reduced.
   From now on we will assume that the presentation (X, R) is super-reduced. This is not
a major restriction. Indeed, if (X, R) is any presentation of G and some r ∈ R is not
super-reduced, then some cyclic permutation of r can be written as r1 r2 where r1 and r2
are relators of G shorter than r. Replacing each such r by the corresponding pair {r1 , r2 }
and repeating the procedure if r1 or r2 is not super-reduced, we obtain a super-reduced
presentation of G.
   The importance of having a super-reduced presentation (X, R) is that for any van
Kampen diagram Ω over (X, R) and any cell F of Ω with n vertices, the associated map
from the topological n-gon Pn to F is a homeomorphism on the entire Pn and not just its
interior.
Cancellation of cells.
Definition 2.7. Let Ω be a disk van Kampen diagram, and let F1 and F2 be distinct cells
of Ω. We will say that the pair (F1 , F2 ) is cancellable if the following conditions hold:
     (i) the intersection ∂F1 ∩ ∂F2 contains at least one edge e;
    (ii) the boundary labels of F1 and F2 are the same if they are read starting from some
         fixed vertex v ∈ ∂F1 ∩ ∂F2 and ∂F1 ∩ ∂F2 is traversed in the same direction;
   (iii) the intersection (∂F1 ∪ ∂F2 ) ∩ ∂Ω is contained in ∂Fi for some i = 1, 2.
  For any cancellable pair (F1 , F2 ) we can construct a new disk diagram Ω′ with the same
boundary label. If the intersection ∂F1 ∩ ∂F2 is connected, we simply remove the cells
10                                                   MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                                                                      •               •               •
                                                                                  v
        •                            •                       •                        •       f
                                                         f                e
                                 v                                                        c
            e
                             c               c
                        •            •           •                                    •
                                                                                          b
                    b            d                   b
                                                                                      •
                        •            •           •
                             a               a                                    a
                                         u               h                                        h
                g                                                                     •
                                                                              g
        •                            •                       •
                                                                                          u
                                                                      •               •               •


                            Figure 2. Cancellation of the two shaded cells

F1 and F2 and identify the parts of their boundaries away from their intersection (this is
possible since we are assuming that R is super-reduced and hence the boundaries ∂F1 and
∂F2 are not self-intersecting).
   In general we let ∆ be the smallest disk subdiagram containing of Ω1 ∩ Ω2 . One can
deduce from our hypotheses that l(∂∆) represents the trivial element of F (X); more
specifically, ∂∆ = (∂∆ ∩ ∂F1 ) ∪ (∂∆ ∩ ∂F2 ), ∂∆ ∩ ∂F1 and ∂∆ ∩ ∂F2 only intersect at
the endpoints, and l(∂∆ ∩ ∂F2 ) = l(∂∆ ∩ ∂F2 )−1 if both paths are traversed in the same
direction starting from the same point in ∂∆∩∂F1 ∩∂F2 . We now construct a new diagram
by removing the interior of ∆ and identifying ∂∆ ∩ ∂F1 and ∂∆ ∩ ∂F2 .
   The operation we just described will be referred to as cancellation of the pair (F1 , F2 )
– see Figure 2 for an illustration. The term reduction commonly used for such operation
will have a completely different meaning in this paper (see Definition 2.12 in the next
subsection).
Remark. The technical condition (iii) is necessary to ensure that in the process of identi-
fying the boundaries of F1 and F2 we do not glue distinct edges of ∂Ω (since in the latter
case the new diagram will have a different boundary label and in fact will not even be a
disk diagram). Typically one simply requires that F1 and F2 are interior cells (in which
case (iii) is automatic).
2.2. Diagram maps and reductions. Throughout this section we fix the following ob-
jects and notations:
     • a group G given by a finite super-reduced presentation (X, R);
     • a finitely generated subgroup H of G;
     • Z = G/H considered as a left G-set. We denote by ρ : G → Z and θ : F (X) → Z
       the natural projections.
   By a diagram we will always mean a Z-labeled disk van Kampen diagram relative to
(X, R) (the labeling will not play a role in some of the definitions). Starting with the
definition of a reduction later in this subsection (Definition 2.12), we will also assume that
Z is endowed with a super-Artinian partial order (an Artinian partial order satisfying an
additional condition – see Definition 2.11 below).
   The sets of vertices and edges of a diagram Ω will be denoted by V (Ω) and E(Ω),
respectively.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )               11

Definition 2.8. Let Ω be a diagram and ∆ a disk subdiagram of Ω. Let ∆′ be another
diagram with ∂∆′ = ∂∆. Consider the diagram obtained from Ω by replacing ∆ by ∆′
(that is, by first removing ∆ and then gluing ∆′ to Ω \ ∆ along ∂∆). In this case we will
say that Ω′ is obtained from Ω by a ∆-map and symbolically write (Ω, ∆) → (Ω′ , ∆′ ) or
simply Ω → Ω′ .
     • By a diagram map we will mean a ∆-map for some ∆.
     • If φ : (Ω, ∆) → (Ω′ , ∆′ ) is a diagram map,
           – the subdiagram ∆ will be called the domain of φ and
           – the subdiagram ∆′ will be called the replacement diagram of φ. We will also
              symbolically write ∆′ = φ(∆).
   It is clear that any diagram map does not change the boundary of the diagram. Any
two diagrams Ω and Ω′ with the same boundary can be obtained from each other by a
diagram map (since we can take ∆ = Ω). We will be primarily using ∆-maps in the case
where all the cells of ∆ share a common vertex. Of particular importance to us will be
single-cell maps.
Definition 2.9. Let φ : (Ω, F) → (Ω′ , ∆′ ) be a diagram map. We will say that φ is a
single-cell map if
     (i) F is a cell of Ω;
    (ii) for each vertex v of F there exists a unique edge e(v) ∈ E(∆′ ) \ E(F) which
         contains v. Edges of the form e(v) will be called the side edges of φ.
Condition (ii) ensures that for each edge e of F , the diagram ∆′ has a unique cell F(e)
containing e. Cells of this from will be called the side cells of φ.
Remark. It would probably be more accurate to call a map of this form a single-cell
refinement. Likewise it might be more natural to drop condition (ii) from Definition 2.9.
However, we decided to stick with a simpler name and more restrictive definition given
how frequently such maps will appear in the paper.
Commuting and conjugating single-cell maps. We now introduce a simple way to
construct single-cell maps.
Definition 2.10. Let F be a cell of a diagram Ω, let t ∈ X, and suppose that t commutes
with every edge label e of F and all the relators [t, e] lie in R. Define the F-map φ : Ω → Ω′
as follows:
    (1) all side edges of φ(F) (the replacement diagram) are labeled by t and all point in
        the same direction;
    (2) for every edge e of F, the corresponding side cell F(e) has boundary label e−1 t−1 et;
    (3) φ(F) has a unique interior cell with the same boundary label as F .
The map φ will be called a commuting F-map and denoted by CF (tε ) where ε = 1 (resp.
ε = −1) if all side edges of φ(F ) point away from (resp. towards) ∂F . See Figure 3 for
an illustration.
Conjugating maps. Let us now describe a certain generalization of commuting F-maps
called conjugating F-maps.
   Fix a diagram Ω, its cell F and t ∈ X, and suppose that for every edge label e of F
there exists a word wt,e ∈ F (X) such that wt,e = t−1 et is a defining relation (that is,
  −1 −1
wt,e t et ∈ R). Let us now remove F from Ω, add side edges as in (1) above, and for
12                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                       •                                                 •
                               t               b             t

                                       •                 •
                                               b
                           a               a         c               c
                                               d
                                       •                 •
                                                                 t
                                   t           d
                       •                                                 •


       Figure 3. Replacement diagram for a commuting single cell map. The
       four black edges come from the original diagram Ω. The four red edges
       labeled t are the side edges. The four cells containing a black edge are the
       side cells.
                                                                     −1 −1
each edge e of ∂F add the side cell F(e) with boundary label wt,e      t Qet. This produces an
annular diagram Ω1 whose inner boundary ∂inn Ω1 has label r1 = e∈∂F wt,e (note that
r1 need not be cyclically reduced or even reduced).
    Suppose first that r1 is super-reduced. In this case we simply choose any diagram G1
with l(∂G1 ) = r1 (note that G1 must be a disk diagram since r1 is super-reduced) and use
it to fill the hole in Ω1 , thereby producing a disk diagram Ω′ .
    In general we proceed as follows. First suppose that r1 is not reduced. Then ∂inn Ω1
contains two consecutive edges e and e′ with the same label and opposite orientation. We
can then produce a new diagram identifying e and e′ . Applying this operation several
times, we produce an annular diagram Ω2 whose inner boundary label r2 is reduced (and
so are its cyclic shifts) and thus cyclically reduced. If r2 is super-reduced, we are done as
before, so assume that r2 is not super-reduced. We will fill the hole in Ω2 in several steps.
    Since r2 is not super-reduced, ∂Qinn Ω2 contains a proper non-empty edge subpath γ ′ with
edges e1 , . . . , em such that r′ = 1i=m l(ei ) is a relator of G, and if we assume that m is
smallest possible, then r′ is super-reduced. Since r′ is a relator of G, we can produce a new
diagram identifying the endpoints of γ ′ (dividing the hole in Ω2 in two parts) and then
fill the hole whose boundary relator is r′ with a disk diagram G ′ such that l(∂G ′ ) = r′ .
Repeating this operation several times, we eventually fill the entire hole in Ω2 , as desired.
Super-Artinian orders. For the remainder of this section we will assume that Z is
endowed with a super-Artinian (as defined below) partial order <.
Definition 2.11. A partial order < on a set P will be called
   (a) Artinian if P does not have infinite strictly descending chains;
  (b) super-Artinian if it is Artinian and whenever p, q ∈ P are incomparable we have
       {r ∈ P : r < p} = {r ∈ P : r < q} and {r ∈ P : r > p} = {r ∈ P : r > q};
   (c) strongly Artinian if it is super-Artinian and for any p ∈ P the set {r ∈ P : r < p}
       is finite.
   It is easy to check that super-Artinian orders on a set P are precisely the orders of the
following form: choose some well-ordered set P0 and a map N : P → P0 (the “norm”
function), and for p, q ∈ P define p < q if and only if N (p) < N (q). The order is strongly
Artinian if in addition we can require that N has finite fibers and P0 ∼= N as posets.
   It might be convenient to visualize super-Artinian orders in this way, although it will
usually be unnecessary to define the norm function explicitly.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                13

   Given vertices v and w of some diagram, we will write v < w or v ≤ w if their labels
satisfy the corresponding inequality. A maximal vertex of a diagram Ω is any vertex of Ω
whose label is a maximal element of the set of labels of the vertices of Ω.
Diagram reductions. We now define the key notion of a diagram reduction (with respect
to the chosen partial order <).
Definition 2.12. Let φ : Ω → Ω′ be a diagram map and v a maximal vertex of Ω. We
will say that
    (i) φ is a reduction if w < v for every vertex w ∈ V (Ω′ ) \ V (Ω);
   (ii) Given a maximal vertex v ∈ V (Ω), φ is a full reduction at v if φ is a reduction
        which also eliminates v.
By a full reduction we will mean a full reduction at some maximal vertex. If ∆ is a disk
subdiagram of Ω, a ∆-reduction is a ∆-map which is a reduction.
  Condition (b) in the definition of a super-Artinian order (Definition 2.11) implies that
the definition of a reduction (Definition 2.12) does not depend on the choice of a maximal
vertex v. Moreover, the following holds:
Observation 2.13. A diagram map φ : Ω → Ω′ is a reduction if and only if for every
w′ ∈ V (Ω′ ) \ V (Ω) there exists w ∈ V (Ω) with w′ < w.
  The next key lemma uses only the fact that < is Artinian.
Lemma 2.14. Any diagram Ω cannot admit an infinite sequence of full reductions. More-
over, Ω cannot admit a sequence of reductions which includes infinitely many full reduc-
tions.
Proof. First note that the composition of reductions is a reduction, and the composition
of a full reduction and a reduction (in either order) is a full reduction. Thus, it suffices to
prove the first assertion of Lemma 2.14.
   Assume that, on the contrary, some diagram Ω admits an infinite sequence of full
reductions Ω = Ω1 → Ω2 → . . ., so that for each n there exists a vertex vn ∈ V (Ωn ) \
V (Ωn+1 ) which is maximal for Ωn (if there is more than one such vertex, we choose vn
arbitrarily). Construct the graphs {Γn }∞ n=1 inductively as follows. The graph Γ1 has no
edges and its vertices are exactly the vertices of Ω1 . Suppose now that Γn is defined for
some n ≥ 1. We define Γn+1 by adding some vertices and edges to Γn . The extra vertices
of Γn+1 are precisely the vertices in V (Ωn+1 ) \ V (Ωn ), and we add a directed edge from
vn to w for every w ∈ V (Ωn+1 ) \ V (Ωn ). Finally, define Γ as the union of all Γn .
   Every vertex of Γ is connected by a path to a vertex of Γ1 , so Γ is an infinite graph with
finitely many connected components and thus must have an infinite connected component
C. Since for every n ∈ N the map Ωn → Ωn+1 is a reduction at vn , each vertex of Γ has
finite degree, and therefore C must have an infinite directed path. But by construction
each vertex in a directed path in Γ is smaller than the previous one, so we obtain an
infinite descending chain in (Z, <), contrary to the assumption that < is Artinian.          □

   Our next result (Lemma 2.15) is a simple consequence of Proposition 2.3 and provides
a criterion for finite presentability of H in terms of reductions. Note that unlike Proposi-
tion 2.3, condition (*) in Lemma 2.15 does not include any assumptions on the boundary
relator of the diagram.
14                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

Lemma 2.15. Let H be a finitely generated subgroup of G, and assume that the chosen
order on Z = G/H is strongly Artinian. Suppose that there exists a finite subset B of Z
with the following property:
    (*) If Ω is any Z-labeled diagram which has an interior maximal vertex v outside of
        B, then Ω admits a full reduction.
Then H is finitely presented.
Proof. Choose any finite A ⊆ Z such that ρ−1 (A) is connected (since H is finitely gen-
erated, such A exists by [EF23, Theorem 2.12]). Clearly we can make B larger (as long
as it remains finite). Thus we can assume that A ⊆ B; further, since the order on Z is
strongly Artinian, we can assume that B = {z ∈ Z : z < z0 } for some z0 ∈ Z.
   By Proposition 2.3, to prove that H is finitely presented it suffices to show that for
any simple closed path γ in Cay(G, X) all of whose vertices lie in ρ−1 (A) there exists a
Z-labeled diagram Ω with ∂Ω = [γ]Z all of whose vertices lie in B.
   Start with any Z-labeled diagram Ω0 with ∂Ω0 = [γ]Z . If all the vertices of Ω0 lie in
B, we are done, so suppose that some vertex v0 does not lie in B. Since ∂Ω0 = [γ]Z , all
boundary vertices of Ω0 lie in A, and by assumption A ⊆ B. Thus, v0 must be an interior
vertex. While v0 need not be maximal, since B = {z ∈ Z : z < z0 }, any maximal vertex
v of Ω0 also lies outside of B (and hence is also interior). Thus by (*) Ω0 admits a full
reduction Ω0 → Ω1 .
   Apply the same procedure to Ω1 and keep going as long as we can. By Lemma 2.14,
after finitely many steps we will obtain a diagram Ω with ∂Ω = [γ]Z which does not admit
a full reduction. But this means that all the vertices of Ω lie in B, as desired.      □
How to construct full reductions. Note that a single-cell map does not eliminate any
vertices from the diagram and in particular cannot be a full reduction. However, as we
will explain next, one can eliminate a vertex v by composing single-cell maps at all cells
adjacent to v followed by suitable cancellations.
Definition 2.16. Let v be a vertex of a diagram Ω and k ∈ N. A subdiagram ∆ of Ω will
be called a gallery of length k at v if ∆ has k cells, all of which contain v, and there exists
an ordering F1 , . . . , Fk of the cells of ∆ such that for each 1 ≤ i ≤ k − 1, the cells Fi and
Fi+1 share at least one edge which contains v. If ∆ is the union of all cells containing v,
we will say that ∆ is the full gallery at v.
Definition 2.17. Let Ω be a diagram, and let F1 and F2 be distinct cells of Ω which have
a common edge e. Suppose that we defined single-cell maps φi : (Ω, Fi ) → (Ω′i , ∆i ) for
i = 1, 2. We will say that φ1 and φ2 are compatible at e if the side cells at e arising from
φ1 and φ2 form a cancellable pair.
Definition 2.18. Let Ω be a diagram, v a vertex of Ω and ∆ a gallery of length k at v
with cells F1 , . . . , Fk , ordered as in Definition 2.16. For each 1 ≤ i ≤ k we fix an edge
ei ∈ E(Fi ) ∩ E(Fi+1 ) containing v. Suppose that
     (i) for each 1 ≤ i ≤ k we defined a single-cell map φi : (Ω, Fi ) → (Ω′i , ∆i );
    (ii) for each 1 ≤ i ≤ k − 1 the maps φi and φi+1 are compatible at ei .
Define φ = ∪φi as follows: first apply each φi individually and then cancel all the can-
cellable pairs arising from condition (ii).
   A map φ of this form will be called a k-fold cell map at v (double-cell map for k = 2
and triple-cell map for k = 3). We will also say that φ is a gallery ∆-map at v.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                 15


            u7                u6                u5          u7          u6          u5


                  y4    w4          w4    y3                      y4    w4    y3


                  w1    v1          v1    w3


            u8                 v                u4          u8    w1    v1    w3    u4


                  w1    v1          v1    w3


                  y1    w2          w2    y2                      y1    w2    y2


            u1                u2                u3          u1          u2          u3


        Figure 4. Full reduction φ at the vertex v. The domain ∆ of φ has 4 rectangular
        cells which are shown in red in the diagram on the left ∆lef t . The entire diagram
        ∆lef t is obtained from ∆ by performing a single-cell map at each cell. The diagram
        on the right (which is the replacement diagram of φ) is obtained from ∆lef t by
        canceling 4 pairs of cells, each of which shares an edge incident to v.

Remark. It is clear that φ is a reduction if and only if each φi is a reduction.
Definition 2.19. Suppose that in Definition 2.18 each φi is a commuting (resp. conju-
gating) map CFi (tε ) for the same t and ε, in which case condition (ii) holds automatically.
The corresponding map φ will be called a commuting ∆-map (resp. conjugating ∆-map)
and denoted by C∆ (tε ).
   If ∆ is the full gallery at an interior vertex v and φ is a gallery ∆-map at v, then φ
eliminates v (see Figure 4 for an illustration), so if φ is also a reduction, it must be a full
reduction at v. In [Re88], it is shown that if G/H is free abelian and H happens to be
finitely presented, one can establish finite presentability of H via Lemma 2.15 by using
only full reductions of this form. In our setting, we will need to work with more complex
full reductions constructed as compositions of several gallery reductions.
Lemma 2.20. Let v be an interior vertex of a diagram Ω, let ∆ be a gallery of length k
at v, and let φ : Ω → Ω′ be a gallery ∆-map. Assume that k < deg (v) (that is, ∆ is not
the full gallery at v), so that φ does not eliminate v. Then deg Ω′ (v) − deg Ω (v) ≤ 2 − k.
In particular, deg Ω′ (v) < deg Ω (v) if k ≥ 3.
Proof. Recall that φ is constructed by first composing single-cell maps at each cell of ∆,
followed by removing certain pairs of cells which share an edge containing v. Each single-
cell map at v increases the degree of v by 1, and each cancellation decreases the degree of
v by 2. By definition of a gallery of length k, we will perform at least k − 1 cancellations.
Therefore, deg Ω′ (v) − deg Ω (v) ≤ k − 2(k − 1) = 2 − k.                                  □
   Lemma 2.20 shows that if for some interior vertex v we can always construct a ∆-
reduction at v for some gallery ∆ at v of length min(3, deg (v)), then we can eliminate
v by applying Lemma 2.20 enough times. Hence if v is also maximal, there exists a full
reduction at v. This observation (which generalizes the basic idea of [Re88]) will still be
insufficient for our purposes. Our general strategy for removing a vertex v from a diagram
16                                       MIKHAIL ERSHOV

will be as follows (the actual algorithm will be even more involved, and at this point we
just want to outline the main idea):
   Fix a maximal vertex v, and assume that v is interior.
     (i) We first apply several single-cell reductions to remove cells with “complicated”
         boundary labels at v. The total number of cells containing v will increase at this
         stage.
    (ii) Then we apply double-cell reductions to remove edges with complicated labels
         containing v.
   (iii) Once all cells and edges at v with complicated labels have been eliminated, we
         will always be able to define a triple-cell reduction (which will not reintroduce new
         complicated cells and edges). Since triple-cell reductions decrease the degree of v,
         after finitely many steps v will be eliminated from the diagram.
2.3. Group and Relations. While our main goal in this paper is to prove finite pre-
sentability of the subgroups of IARn,d and IACn,d of Aut(Fn ), it will be more con-
venient to work with the corresponding subgroups of the group SAut(F  ^n ) defined be-
low. As usual, SAut(Fn ) is the preimage of SLn (Z) under the natural homomorphism
Aut(Fn ) → GLn (Z); thus it is an index 2 subgroup of Aut(Fn ). We define SAut(F ^n ) to
be the universal central extension of SAut(Fn ).
   Gersten [Ge84] gave a very simple Steinberg-type presentation of SAut(Fn ) for all n ≥ 3.
                                                                         ^n ) from that
Moreover, he proved that if n ≥ 5, one can obtain a presentation of SAut(F
presentation of SAut(Fn ) by dropping one family of relations and that the kernel of the
             ^n ) → SAut(Fn ) is cyclic of order 2. We define IAR
projection SAut(F                                                 ^   n,d (resp. IACn,d ) to
                                                                                  ^
be the preimage of IARn,d ∩ SAut(Fn ) (resp. IACn,d ∩ SAut(Fn )) in SAut(F ^n ). Clearly, if
n ≥ 5, finite presentability of IAR
                                 ^  n,d (resp. IACn,d ) implies that of IARn,d (resp. IACn,d ).
                                                ^

   We proceed with describing Gersten’s presentations for SAut(Fn ) and SAut(F ^n ) estab-
lished in [Ge84]. This presentation uses the standard generating set consisting of Nielsen
maps Rij : xi 7→ xi xj and Lij : xi 7→ xj xi with i ̸= j, but it is easiest to describe it by
adding extra generators wij given by wij = Lij L−1
                                                 ji Rij .
Theorem 2.21 (Gersten [Ge84]). The group SAut(Fn ) has a presentation with a gener-
ating set {Rij , Lij , wij : 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ n} subject to the following relations. Here Tij stands
for either Rij or Lij and in each relation distinct letters denote distinct indices:
(2.1)   [Rij , Lij ] = 1     [Tij , Tkl ] = 1     [Tij , Tkj ] = 1
                                     −1             −1
(2.2)   [Rjk , Rij ] = Rik   [Rij , Rjk ] = Rik   [Rij , Ljk ] = Rik    [L−1
                                                                          jk , Rij ] = Rik
(2.3)   [Ljk , Lij ] = Lik   [Lij , L−1
                                     jk ] = Lik   [L−1
                                                    ij , Rjk ] = Lik
                                                                          −1
                                                                        [Rjk , Lij ] = Lik
(2.4)   wij = Lij L−1
                   ji Rij
                                        −1
                             wij = Rij Rji Lij
         −1
(2.5)   wij Rij wij = L−1
                       ji
                              −1
                             wij            −1
                                 Lij wij = Rji     −1
                                                  wij            −1
                                                      Rji wij = Rij      −1
                                                                        wij Lij wij = L−1
                                                                                       ij
         −1
(2.6)   wij Rik wij = L−1
                       ik
                              −1
                             wij            −1
                                 Lik wij = Rik     −1
                                                  wij            −1
                                                      Rki wij = Rkj      −1
                                                                        wij Lki wij = L−1
                                                                                       kj
               −1
(2.7)   wji = wij
         4
(2.8)   wij =1
In addition, the following hold for n ≥ 5:
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                        17


         •                                                                                       •
                                                   L12
                     L14       •                    •                    •         L42
                                         L42                  L14
             R12                   R12                  R12                  R12           R12

                   L14         •                    •                    •           L42
                                         L42                  L14
         •                                                                                       •
                                                   L12



                         Figure 5. Deducing [R12 , L12 ] = 1 from other relations

                   ^n ) can be defined by the presentation obtained from the one above
   (a) The group SAut(F
                                                  4 = 1).
       by removing the last family of relations (wij
                                      ^n ) → SAut(Fn ) is cyclic of order 2.
   (b) The kernel of the projection SAut(F
Remark. 1. Presentation in [Ge84] actually has fewer relations – (2.5),(2.6) and (2.7)
follow from the other relations; however, it will be convenient for us to include them to
simplify the description of reduction maps.
   2. Gersten’s presentation was derived from McCool’s presentation for Aut(Fn ) given
in [Mc74a], but the latter has a much larger generating set consisting of Whitehead
maps. These are automorphisms of the form Ti,A,B where A and B are disjoint subsets of
{1, . . . , n} \ {i} and
                                        
                                         xj xi        if j ∈ A \ B;
                                         −1
                                        
                                          xi xj        if j ∈ B \ A;
                         Ti,A,B (xj ) =     −1
                                          x    x j x i if j ∈ A ∩ B;
                                         i
                                        
                                        
                                          xj           if j ̸∈ A ∪ B.
Extended Nielsen generators. We will refer to the generating set from Theorem 2.21
as the extended set of Nielsen generators. The elements Rij and Lij will be called Nielsen
generators and the elements wij will be called Weyl generators.
Optimized Gersten’s presentation. Figure 5 shows that the relations [Rij , Lij ] = 1
actually follow from other relations involving Nielsen generators and therefore can (and
will) be removed. It will also be convenient for us to remove half of the Weyl generators
– namely we will keep only the generators wij with i < j, thereby removing wij for i > j
                                                             −1
along with the relations in (2.7) (and replacing wij by wji     for i > j in other relations).
   Thus, for n ≥ 5 the group SAut(F ^n ) has a presentation ⟨X |R⟩ where X = {Rij , Lij :
1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ n} ⊔ {wij : 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n} and R is the set of all relations in Theorem 2.21
                                                                                          −1
except [Rij , Lij ] = 1, (2.7) and (2.8) (where wij for i > j should be interpreted as wji   in
                                                          ^n ) will be called the optimized
(2.4),(2.5) and (2.6)). The obtained presentation of SAut(F
Gersten’s presentation.
Action of the signed symmetric group. Now let Σn = Sn ⋊ {±1}n be the signed
symmetric group of degree n, and consider the natural action of Σn on the free group
Fn = F (x1 , . . . , xn ). This action induces an action of Σn on Aut(Fn ) (by conjugation)
which preserves X ∪ X −1 where X = {Rij , Lij : 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ n} ⊔ {wij : 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n}
as above. Thus we can extend this action to the free group F (X ). The obtained action
on F (X ) almost preserves the set R of relations from optimized Gersten’s presentation;
18                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

more precisely it does preserve R if we view elements of R as geometric relations in the
following sense:
Definition 2.22. Let X be a set. A geometric relator on X is an equivalence class of
cyclically reduced words in X ⊔ X −1 where two words v and w are equivalent if w can be
obtained from v or v −1 by a cyclic permutation.
Remark. 1. The reason we call such equivalence classes geometric relators is the following.
If Ω is a van Kampen diagram with a cyclically reduced boundary label, then the set of all
possible ways to read the boundary label of Ω (where the starting point and the direction
can be chosen arbitrarily) form a geometric relator.
   2. Let u, v ∈ F (X) be reduced words which start with different symbols and end with
different symbols. Then the 4 words u−1 v, uv −1 , v −1 u, vu−1 are cyclically reduced and all
lie in the same equivalence class. Thus, we can safely write geometric relators in the form
u = v (rather than w = 1) without ambiguity.
   It will be convenient to write as many relators as possible in the form u−1 vu = f (u, v)
where u and v are generators or their inverses and f (u, v) is a short word since this will sim-
plify construction of conjugating single-cell maps (see the paragraph after Definition 2.10
in § 2.2). Of course, it is trivial to write relations of the form [u, v] = 1 (where u, v are
generators) in this way. Below we give such expressions for relations in (2.2) and (2.3). In
fact, we give two different expressions for some of these relations, swapping the roles of u
and v.
Observation 2.23. The following relations hold:
 −1                −1  −1                                   −1            −1
Rjk Rij Rjk = Rij Rik Rij Rjk Rij = Rjk Rik        Rjk Rij Rjk = Rij Rik Rij Rjk Rij = Rik Rjk
L−1            −1
 jk Rij Ljk = Rik Rij
                                  −1
                         Rij Ljk Rij        −1
                                     = Ljk Rik Ljk Rij L−1
                                                        jk = Rik Rij
                                                                                     −1
                                                                            Rij Ljk Rij    −1
                                                                                        = Rik Ljk
L−1                −1
 jk Lij Ljk = Lij Lik    L−1
                          ij Ljk Lij = Lik Ljk     Ljk Lij L−1
                                                            jk = Lij Lik    L−1
                                                                             ij Ljk Lij = Ljk Lik
 −1
Rjk Lij Rjk = L−1
               ik Lij    Lij Rjk L−1        −1
                                  ij = Rjk Lik
                                                            −1
                                                   Rjk Lij Rjk = Lik Lij    Lij Rjk L−1    −1
                                                                                     ij = Lik Rjk

2.4. Actions on the diagrams and the partial order. Fix integers n ≥ 2 and 1 ≤
                  ^n ), and let H be either IAC
d ≤ n, let G = SAut(F                             ^   n,d or IARn,d . Our goal is to prove finite
                                                              ^
presentability of H (for d as in Theorem 1.1) using the general method described in § 2.2.
Recall that in the setting of § 2.2, the vertices of the van Kampen diagrams are labeled by
elements of the space G/H which was denoted by Z in § 2.2. For the discussion below it
will be convenient to define Z not as G/H itself, but as a simple-to-describe G-set which
is isomorphic to G/H (as a G-set).
   Given g ∈ G, let [g] be its natural projection to SLn (Z). There are two natural actions
of SLn (Z) on the set M atd×n (Z) of d × n matrices over Z. Using the projection g 7→ [g],
we will view these as actions of G:
(2.9)                           g.A = A[g]−1       (row action)
(2.10)                        g.A = A[g]T        (column action).
Let In,d = (Id |0d×n ) ∈ M atd×n (Z) be the matrix whose first d columns form the identity
d × d matrix and whose last n − d columns are zero. For both actions, the G-orbit of
In,d consists of matrices which we will call unimodular (although it would have been more
accurate to call them column-unimodular):
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                  19

Definition 2.24. A matrix A ∈ M atd×n (Z) will be called unimodular if its columns span
Zd . We will denote the set of all d × n-unimodular matrices by U md×n (Z).
   As in the introduction, let Rown,d (resp. Coln,d ) be the subgroup of GLn (Z) consisting
of matrices whose first d rows (resp. first d columns) coincide with those of the identity
matrix. We can reformulate the definition of IAR
                                               ^   n,d and IACn,d as follows:
                                                             ^

          IARn,d = {g ∈ G : [g] ∈ Rown,d } and IACn,d = {g ∈ G : [g] ∈ Coln,d }.
           ^                                    ^

On the other hand, it is straightforward to check that IAR
                                                         ^  n,d (resp. IACn,d ) is the stabilizer
                                                                        ^
of In,d with respect to (2.9) (resp. (2.10)) – this explains the names ‘row action’ and
‘column action’.
   Thus, if H = IAR^     n,d (resp. H = IACn,d ), then G/H is isomorphic as a G-set to
                                            ^
Z = U md×n (Z) with the row (resp. column) action above. We will refer to the groups
IAR
 ^   n,d (resp. IACn,d ) as the row-stabilizer (resp. column-stabilizer) groups.
                 ^
   The following two simple observations describe the actions of the Nielsen generators on
M atd×n (Z) and an explicit isomorphism of G-sets between G/H and U md×n (Z). Both
results follow immediately from the definitions.
Lemma 2.25. Let A ∈ M atd×n (Z).
  (a) If G acts on M atd×n (Z) via the row action (2.9), then Rij .A = Lij .A is the matrix
      obtained from A by subtracting the j th column of A from the ith column of A.
  (b) If G acts on M atd×n (Z) via the column action (2.10), then Rij .A = Lij .A is the
      matrix obtained from A by adding the ith column of A to the j th column of A.
Lemma 2.26. Recall that g 7→ [g] is the natural projection from G to SLn (Z), and define
φ : G → U md×n (Z) as follows:
    (a) If H = IAR                                                                  −1
                  n,d , let φ(g) be the matrix consisting of the first d rows of [g] .
                ^
   (b) If H = IAC                                                                   T
                  n,d , let φ(g) be the matrix consisting of the first d rows of [g] .
               ^
Then φ induces an isomorphism of G-sets G/H → U md×n (Z).
   From now on we will identify G/H with U md×n (Z) via the isomorphism from Lemma 2.26,
although an explicit formula for the latter will only be used in the proof of Proposition 5.6
at the end of the paper. By contrast, the formulas from Lemma 2.25 will be frequently
used in computations without further mention.
   In order to proceed with the method outlined in § 2.2, we need to fix a super-Artinian
partial order on U md×n (Z). We will define such an order on M atd×n (Z) (but will only
use its restriction to U md×n (Z)).
   For the remainder of this section we will only consider the case d = 1 (in which case we
will write Zn instead of M at1×n (Z)). For d > 1, the proof of Theorem 1.1 will be more
involved, and we will use different orders in different parts of the proof. The description
of those orders for d > 1 will be postponed until § 5.
Definition 2.27. Take any element x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) in Zn , let M = ∥x∥∞ = max{|xi |}
and fix 1 ≤ i ≤ n. We will say that the ith coordinate of x is
      • maximal if |xi | = M ;
      • zero if xi = 0;
      • good otherwise.
20                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV

We will also say that a coordinate is bad if it is not good. We will denote the number of
maximal, zero and good coordinates of x by m(x), z(x) and g(x), respectively.

   Let us now endow Z4≥0 with the (total) lexicographical order where we compare two
elements by first comparing their first coordinates, then their second coordinates, etc.
Define the map N : Zn → Z4≥0 by
                             N (x) = (∥x∥∞ , m(x), n − g(x), ∥x∥1 ),
and define a partial order on Zn by setting x < y ⇐⇒ N (x) < N (y) (with respect to the
lexicographical order on Z4≥0 ).
   The obtained order on Zn is strongly Artinian (in particular, super-Artinian) since
 ∞
ℓ -balls in Zn are finite.
   More explicitly, two vectors in Zn can be compared by successively applying the follow-
ing criteria (we start by applying the first criterion; if it separates the vectors, we stop; if
it is indecisive, we move to the second one, etc.):
     (1) a vector with the larger ℓ∞ -norm is larger;
     (2) a vector with the larger number of maximal coordinates is larger;
     (3) a vector with the smaller number of good coordinates is larger;
     (4) a vector with the larger ℓ1 -norm is larger.
If two vectors cannot be separated using the criteria (1)-(4), they are declared incompa-
rable.
Motivating the order. Before proceeding, let us provide some motivation for the above
order. We start with a general definition.
Definition 2.28. Let G be a group generated by a finite set S, and assume that G acts
transitively on a poset P . Given v ∈ P , its return degree deg −
                                                                S (v) is the number of pairs
(w, s) ∈ P × S ∪ S such that w < v and w = sv. In other words, deg −
                   −1
                                                                          S (v) is the number
of edges in the Schreier graph Sch(G, S) connecting v to a smaller vertex.
   Suppose now that G is finitely presented and we are given a P -labeled van Kampen
diagram Ω over some finite presentation (S, R) of G. Fix a maximal vertex v of Ω.
Intuitively, one would expect that the larger deg −   S (v) is, the easier it is to construct a full
reduction of Ω at v.
   The following lemma shows that in the case we are interested in, all vertices whose
labels lie outside of a fixed finite set have sufficiently large return degree:

Lemma 2.29. Let G = SAut(F  ^n ), X its optimized Nielsen generating set and P =
U m1,n (Z) with one of the G-actions from (2.9), (2.10). Let v ∈ P with ∥v∥∞ ≥ 2.
Then deg −         n+1
          X (v) ≥ ⌊ 3 ⌋.

Remark. Lemma 2.29 does not seem to have a useful counterpart for some more natural
partial orders on U m1,n (Z). For instance, if we order vectors first by ℓ∞ -norm and then
by ℓ1 -norm, then for any n there will be infinitely many elements of U m1,n (Z) of return
degree 2. Indeed, let v = (a, b, 0, . . . , 0) where a and b are coprime and |a| > 2|b|. The
neighbors of v in the Schreier graph Sch(G, X ) are obtained from v either by a signed
permutation of coordinates (in which case we get an element incomparable to v) or by
adding or subtracting the ith coordinate from the j th coordinate for some i and j, in which
case we can only get a smaller element when i = 2 and j = 1, and the sign is uniquely
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                    21

determined by a and b. Thus, v has at most 1 neighbor w with w < v, and there are
2 elements s ∈ S ∪ S −1 such that w = sv (the possible choices for s are {Rij  ε , Lε } or
                                                                                    ij
   ε , Lε } with ε = ±1 depending on the signs of a and b and whether we work with the
{Rji    ji
row or the column action). It is not hard to check that extending this partial order to a
total order will not resolve the problem.
  We will not formally apply Lemma 2.29 in this paper, but its proof should provide a
good preview of how single-cell reductions will be constructed in the next section.
Proof of Lemma 2.29. We will give a proof for the row G-action (2.9); the proof for the
column action is analogous. Also without loss of generality we can assume that all coor-
dinates of v are non-negative.
   Recall that m(v), g(v) and z(v) denote the number of maximal, good and zero coor-
dinates of v, respectively. Thus, m(v) + g(v) + z(v) = n. For simplicity of notation let
t = ⌊ n+1
        3 ⌋, so that n ≥ 3t−1. Hence one of the following 3 inequalities holds: m(v) ≥ t+1,
g(v) ≥ t or z(v) ≥ t. We consider the 3 cases accordingly.
   Case 1: m(v) ≥ t + 1. Without loss of generality we can assume that v1 , . . . , vt+1 (the
first t+1 coordinates of v) are maximal. Then the vectors R12 v, . . . , R1,t+1 v are all distinct
(since vi ̸= 0 for 2 ≤ i ≤ t + 1) and all less than v since each of them is obtained from
v by replacing a maximal coordinate by 0. Thus v has at least t smaller neighbors, so in
particular deg − X (v) ≥ t.
   Case 2: g(v) ≥ t. Without loss of generality assume that the first coordinate v1 is
maximal and v2 , . . . , vt+1 are all good. Then the vectors R12 v, . . . , R1,t+1 v are all less
than v since each of them either has smaller ℓ∞ -norm than v (this happens if v1 is the
unique maximal coordinate) or has the same ℓ∞ -norm but fewer maximal coordinates (if
v has more than 1 maximal coordinate). Unlike Case 1, the vectors {R1i v}t+1         i=2 need not
be distinct, but the pairs (R1i v, R1i ) are definitely distinct, so we still have deg − X (v) ≥ t.
   Case 3: z(v) ≥ t. This is the only case where we use the assumptions that ∥v∥∞ ≥ 2
and v is unimodular. Together they imply that v has at least one good coordinate.
Without loss of generality assume that the first coordinate v1 is good and v2 , . . . , vt+1 are
all zero. Then the vectors R21 v, . . . , Rt+1,1 v are all distinct and all less than v since each
of them is obtained from v by replacing a zero coordinate by a good coordinate, so again
deg −X (v) ≥ t.                                                                                  □
  Let us now establish a simple, but very useful, criterion for a commuting map to be a
reduction with respect to the above partial order.
Definition 2.30.
   (a) Let w ∈ F (X ). Its support supp (w) is the set of all indices which appear in w
       (written as a reduced word in X ⊔ X −1 ).
  (b) Now let Ω be a diagram. For every edge e ∈ E(Ω) its support supp (e) is the
       support of its label l(e).
   (c) Given a subdiagram ∆ of Ω, we define supp (∆) to be the union of the supports
       of all edges of ∆.
Lemma 2.31. Recall that d = 1 in this part of § 2. Let v be an interior maximal vertex
of a diagram Ω and M = ∥v∥∞ . Let F be a cell containing v, let i ̸= j be distinct indices
                                                   ±1    ±1
not contained in supp (F), and let Sij be either {Rij , Rji } or {L±1    ±1
                                                                   ij , Lji }. Then one of
22                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

the commuting maps CF (x) with x ∈ Sij is a reduction with the exception of the following
cases:
     (i) vi = vj = 0;
    (ii) |vi | = M and vj = 0 or vice versa;
   (iii) vi and vj are both good and |vi | = |vj |.
                                           ±1    ±1
Proof. We will give a proof for Sij = {Rij    , Rji }; the proof in the other case is identical.
Below we will show that there exists x ∈ Sij such that xv < v only using the above
assumptions on vi and vj (and not the fact that v is maximal). Since i, j ̸∈ supp (F),
all vertices of F have the same ith and j th coordinates. Thus, the same argument would
imply that xw < w for any vertex w of F, and therefore CF (x) is a reduction.
    As in Lemma 2.29, we will give a proof for the row action (2.9). Suppose that none of
(i)-(iii) holds. Without loss of generality we can assume that 0 ≤ vi ≤ vj . Since (i) does
not hold, we must have vj > 0.
    Case 1: vj = M . Since (ii) does not hold, vi > 0 which implies that Rji v < v.
    Case 2: 0 < vj < M . In this case vj is good. Since (iii) does not hold, vi < vj . If vi = 0,
then Rij v and v have the same ℓ∞ -norm and the same number of maximal coordinates,
but Rij v has more good coordinates, so Rij v < v. And if vi > 0, then Rji v and v have the
same ℓ∞ -norm, the same numbers of maximal and good coordinates, but Rij v has smaller
ℓ1 -norm, so again Rij v < v.                                                                  □
Maximal, good and bad relative to a diagram. We finish this section with a technical
variation of an earlier definition which will simplify the terminology later in the paper.
Definition 2.32. let Ω be a diagram, let M = ∥Ω∥ = max{∥w∥ : w ∈ V (Ω)}, and let
c ∈ Z with |c| ≤ M . We will say that c is Ω-maximal (resp. Ω-good) if |c| = M (resp.
0 < |c| < M ) and c is Ω-bad if it is not Ω-good.
  The following observation summarizes the basic relation between the above properties
with respect to a diagram and with respect to a particular vertex of that diagram.
Observation 2.33. Let w be a vertex of a diagram Ω and c a coordinate of w. The
following hold:
    (a) If c is a good coordinate of w, then c is Ω-good.
    (b) If c is Ω-maximal, then c is a maximal coordinate of w and ∥w∥ = ∥Ω∥.
     (c) If ∥w∥ = ∥Ω∥, then c is a maximal (resp. good) coordinate of w if and only if c is
         Ω-maximal (resp. Ω-good).
     The following obvious fact turns out to be very important:
Observation 2.34. Let a, b ∈ Z, and suppose that a, b and a + b are coordinates of some
vertices (possibly distinct) of some diagram Ω. Then either all three of them are Ω-bad or
at least two of them are Ω-good.
Proof. This holds since if M = ∥Ω∥ and c ∈ Z with |c| ≤ M , then c is Ω-bad of and only
if M divides c.                                                                      □

                           3. Finite presentability of IARn,1
3.1. Preliminaries. In this section we will prove finite presentability of the row stabilizer
group IARn,1 for n ≥ 26.
      ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                23

                                                                      ^n ), H = IAR
   We will fix the following notations throughout this section: G = SAut(F       ^  n,1
                                                                 ∼
and Z = U m1×n (Z) with the row G-action (2.9). Recall that Z = G/H as a G-set and we
identify Z with G/H via the isomorphism from Lemma 2.26. We also let (X , R) be the
optimized Gersten’s presentation of G (see § 2.3).
   The majority of this section will be devoted to proving the following result:
Proposition 3.1. Assume that n ≥ 6. Let Ω be a Z-labeled diagram over (X , R), let
v ∈ V (Ω) be an interior maximal vertex and F a cell of Ω containing v. Assume in
addition that either ∥v∥∞ > 1 or ∥v∥∞ = 1 and ∥v∥1 ≥ 6. Then Ω admits a single-cell
F-reduction.
   We will prove Proposition 3.1 by a case-by-case argument depending on the type of
F (as defined below). Ultimately we will need not just this result, but some additional
information about the reductions constructed in the proof.
   We start with some simple preliminary observations.
Action on diagrams. Recall that Σn denotes the signed symmetric group of degree n.
As we explained in § 2.3, Σn acts on F (X ) preserving R as a set of geometric relations
and hence also acts on G. Given σ ∈ Σn , let Mσ ∈ GLn (Z) be the corresponding signed
permutation matrix. Recall that for g ∈ G we denote by [g] its canonical image in GLn (Z).
It is straightforward to check that
                      [σ(g)] = Mσ [g]Mσ−1 for all g ∈ G and σ ∈ Σn .
There is also a natural action of Σn on Z = U m1×n (Z) given by σ(z) = zMσ−1 for all
z ∈ Z and σ ∈ Σn .
Observation 3.2. For all g ∈ G and z ∈ Z we have σ(g.z) = σ(g).σ(z).
Proof. Recall that g.z = z[g]−1 , so σ(g.z) = z[g]−1 Mσ−1 . On the other hand,
σ(g).σ(z) = σ(z)[σ(g)]−1 = zMσ−1 (Mσ [g]Mσ−1 )−1 = zMσ−1 (Mσ [g]−1 Mσ−1 ) = z[g]−1 Mσ−1 .        □
   Observation 3.2 implies that there is an induced action of Σn on the set of Z-labeled
diagrams over (X , R).
   When proving Proposition 3.1 we can replace the given diagram Ω by σΩ for any σ ∈ Σn .
Indeed, suppose that the hypotheses of Proposition 3.1 hold for some diagram Ω and its cell
F and we constructed a single-cell reduction φ : (σΩ, σF) → (Ω′ , ∆′ ) of the diagram σΩ at
its cell σF. We can consider the induced diagram map σ −1 φ : (Ω, F ) → (σ −1 Ω′ , σ −1 ∆′ ).
The map σ −1 φ is also a reduction since our partial order on Z is Σn -invariant (that is,
z < z ′ implies σ(z) < σ(z ′ ) for all σ ∈ Σn ).
   In addition to the action of Σn , we also have a simple action of Z/2Z on the set of Z-
labeled diagrams: the non-trivial element of Z/2Z simply multiplies all the vertex labels
by −1. Note that this action commutes with the Σn -action.
   Recall that we defined the notion of support for words in F (X ) and Z-labeled diagrams
over (X , R) at the end of § 2 (see Definition 2.30). The following observation records some
of its basic properties:
Observation 3.3. Let Ω be any Z-labeled diagram over (X , R). The following hold:
   (i) |supp (r)| ≤ 4 for any r ∈ R and hence |supp (F)| ≤ 4 for any cell F of Ω.
  (ii) If ∆ is a gallery of length k in Ω, then supp (∆) ≤ 2k + 2.
24                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV

     (iii) Assume that n ≥ 6, and let Σn (1) be the subgroup of Σn consisting of permutations
           which stabilize the set {x1 , x−1
                                          1 }. Then any orbit of the action of Σn (1) on R
           contains a relator r such that 4 ̸∈ supp (r).
Proof. (i) follows immediately from the form of the defining relations. To prove (ii), let
F1 , . . . , Fk be the cells of ∆ ordered as in the definition of a gallery (Definition 2.16). Since
Fi and Fi+1 share at least one edge, we have |supp (Fi ) ∩ supp (Fi+1 )| ≥ 2. Thus, each cell
starting with F2 contributes at most 2 new indices to supp (∆) and hence |supp (∆)| ≤
4 + 2(k − 1) = 2k + 2.
   (iii) Take any r0 ∈ R in the given orbit, and assume that 4 ∈ supp (r0 ). Since n ≥ 6
and |supp (r0 )| ≤ 4, there exists i ∈ {2, 3, 5, 6} such that i ̸∈ supp (r0 ). But then the
transposition (i, 4) lies in Σn (1) and r = (i, 4)r0 does not contain 4 in its support.           □
   Let us now fix Ω, v and F as in Proposition 3.1, and write v = (v1 , . . . , vn ). Since
|supp (F)| ≤ 4 and n ≥ 6, we have n ≥ |supp (F)| + 2, whence at least one of the following
conditions holds:
    (1) (maximal coordinate case): there exist i, j ̸∈ supp (F ) such that vi and vj are both
        maximal;
    (2) (good coordinate case): there exists i ̸∈ supp (F) such that vi is good;
    (3) (zero coordinate case): there exists i ̸∈ supp (F) such that vi is zero.
   In the maximal coordinate case the proof of Proposition 3.1 is completely straightfor-
                                                          ±1          ±1
ward – indeed, in this case one of the four maps CF (Rij     ), CF (Rij  ) (with i, j as in (1)
above) is a reduction by Lemma 2.31.
   In the good and zero coordinate cases we will use the action of Σn × Z/2Z to make some
additional assumptions which will greatly simplify the notations in the proofs. First, let
us choose a set of representatives Rrep of the orbits of Σn (1) on R (considered as a set of
geometric relators) with the property that 4 ̸∈ supp (r) for all r ∈ Rrep (this is possible
by Observation 3.3(iii)).
Lemma 3.4. In the good coordinate case, it suffices to prove Proposition 3.1 under the
following additional assumptions:
      (i) v1 is maximal and positive;
     (ii) v4 is good and positive;
    (iii) l(∂F) ∈ Rrep ; in particular 4 ̸∈ supp (l(∂F )).
Proof. Let r = l(∂F). We will show that conditions (i)-(iii) can be achieved after acting
by a suitable element of Σn ×Z/2Z. To simplify the notations we will change the definition
of r throughout the proof as we act by different elements.
   Step 1: We first permute the coordinates so that v1 is maximal.
   Step 2: Next we act by some σ ∈ Σn (1) so that l(∂F) ∈ Rrep . The definition of Σn (1)
ensures that v1 will remain maximal (although it may change its sign).
   Step 3: Next we ensure that v4 is good. By definition of Rrep , after Step 2 we have
4 ̸∈ supp (r). Since we are in the good coordinate case, we also know that vi is good for
some i ̸∈ supp (r), and moreover i ̸= 1 since v1 is maximal. If i = 4, we are done (with
Step 3). If i ̸= 4, we act by the transposition (i, 4); this makes v4 good without affecting
the conclusions of Step 1 and 2 since i ̸= 1 and i, 4 ̸∈ supp (r).
   Step 4: Now we ensure that v1 > 0. Since v1 is maximal, it is nonzero. If v1 > 0, we are
done; otherwise we act by the non-trivial element of Z/2Z (multiplying all coordinates of
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                   25

v by −1). This operation does not change any relators, so the conclusion of Step 2 still
holds, and clearly the conclusions of Steps 1 and 3 are not affected.
  Step 5: Finally, we ensure that v4 > 0. Since v4 is good, it is nonzero. If v4 > 0, we
are done; otherwise we act by the signed permutation x4 7→ x−1 4 . Since 4 ̸∈ supp (r), this
does not affect the conclusions of Steps 1-4.                                             □
  The following result is an analogue of Lemma 3.4 in the zero coordinate case.
Lemma 3.5. In the zero coordinate case, it suffices to prove Proposition 3.1 under the
following additional assumptions:
      (i) v1 is good and positive;
     (ii) v4 is zero;
    (iii) l(∂F) ∈ Rrep ; in particular 4 ̸∈ supp (l(∂F )).
Proof. If ∥v∥ > 1, then v must have at least one good coordinate, and we can argue as in
the proof of Lemma 3.4. If ∥v∥ = 1, then by the hypotheses of Proposition 3.1 there exist
at least 2 indices i, j ̸∈ supp (F) such that |vi | = |vj | = 1, so vi and vj are both maximal,
and we are done by the maximal coordinate case.                                              □
   Recall that Σn (1) is the stabilizer of {x1 , x−11 } in Σn . Let R1 be the set of relators
in R whose support includes index 1. The action of Σn (1) on R preserves R1 , and it is
straightforward to check that the action of Σn (1) on R1 has 14 orbits whose representatives
are listed in Table 1 below. We will say that two cells in the diagram have the same type
if their boundary relators lie in the same orbit. The types will be denoted by integers 1
through 12 as well as symbols 6′ and 7′ . Single-cell reductions for type 6′ (resp. type 7′ )
will be completely analogous to those for type 6 (resp. 7) and hence will not be discussed
explicitly.
   We will also keep track of the orbits under the smaller subgroup Σ+     n (1) which consists of
signed permutations fixing both x1 and x−1    1  . Since [Σn (1) : Σ+ (1)] = 2, each Σ (1)-orbit
                                                                    n                   n
on R1 either remains a single orbit or splits into two orbits under Σ+        n (1). In the latter
case we will distinguish between the left subtype and right subtype denoted by iL and iR
where i is the underlying type.
   Table 1 below is structured as follows. Each row of the table corresponds to a cell
type or subtype, which is listed in the first column, and the second column contains a
(chosen) relator for that type/subtype. Columns 3 and 4 contain information about the
single-cell reduction map for each type/subtype in the good coordinate case: column 3
lists the possible labels of side edges (this information is only provided for cell types which
will appear in double-cell and triple-cell reductions) and column 4 lists the possible types
of side cells (we only care about side cells containing v, the chosen maximal vertex, but in
most cases v will not be specified on the diagram, so all side cells need to be considered).
Finally, columns 5 and 6 contain the analogous information for the zero coordinate case.



  Before turning to the proof of Proposition 3.1 in the good and zero coordinate cases
we introduce some additional notations and terminology. Let I be a non-empty subset of
{1, . . . , n}. Given v ∈ Zn , we denote by vI ∈ Z|I| the vector obtained from v by removing
the j th coordinate for all j ̸∈ I.
Definition 3.6.
26                                       MIKHAIL ERSHOV

                       Table 1. Single-cell maps for the group IARn,1 .

                                       good coordinate case         zero coordinate case
       type          relation         side edges  side cells      side edges  side cells
        1R      [R23 , R12 ] = R13       L14         5, 6L                        2, 7
        1L      [L23 , L12 ] = L13       R14         5, 6R                        2, 7
        2R      [R13 , R21 ] = R23       L14         2L, 5        R41 or R43   2R, 4, 7
        2L      [R13 , L21 ] = R23       R14         2R, 5        R41 or R43   2L, 4, 7
         3      [R21 , R32 ] = R31                    2, 6                        4, 7
         4       [R21 , R31 ] = 1                       2            R41            4
         5        [R12 , L13 ] = 1       L14         5, 1L                     2, 6, 6′ , 9
        6R       [R12 , R35 ] = 1        L14         5, 6L                       2R, 7
        6L        [L12 , R35 ] = 1       R14         5, 6R                       2L, 7
        6′ R     [R12 , R32 ] = 1        L14         5, 6L                       2R, 7
        6′ L      [L12 , R32 ] = 1       R14         5, 6R                       2L, 7
         7       [R21 , R35 ] = 1                     2, 6           R41          4, 7
         7′       [R21 , L23 ] = 1                    2, 6           R41          4, 7
                     −1                                    ′
         8     L12 L21 R12 = w12                 1, 2, 5, 7 , 11             2, 3, 4, 6′ , 12
         9     L21 L−1
                     12 R21 = w21                1, 2, 5, 7′ , 11            2, 3, 4, 6′ , 12
                 −1                −1
        10     w12  R21 w12 = R12                1, 2, 5, 7′ , 11               2, 3, 12
                 −1               −1          −1
       11L     w12 R13 w12 = L23       L14 , R24   5, 6, 11R                  2, 6, 7, 12
                          −1                  −1
       11L     w12 R13 w12     = R23 L14 , R24     5, 6, 11R                  2, 6, 7, 12
                 −1               −1          −1
       11R     w12 L13 w12 = R23       R14 , L24   5, 6, 11L                  2, 6, 7, 12
                          −1                  −1
       11R     w12 R13 w12 = R23 R14 , L24         5, 6, 11R                  2, 6, 7, 12
                 −1                −1
        12     w12 R31 w12 = R32                  2, 6, 7, 11      R41 , R42     4, 12


     (a) Let Ω be a diagram. The I-trace of Ω denoted by ΩI is obtained from Ω by keeping
         the same vertices, edges and edge labels and replacing v by vI for every vertex label
         v in Ω (note that ΩI is not a Z-labeled diagram).
     (b) Let φ be a diagram map and ∆′ its replacement diagram. Let I be a subset of
         {1, . . . , n}. We will say that φ is supported on I if for every j ̸∈ I all vertices of ∆′
         have the same j th coordinate.
   From the definition of our partial order it is clear that if φ is supported on I, then in
order to check whether φ : (Ω, ∆) → (Ω′ , ∆′ ) is a reduction, it suffices to know the I-trace
of ∆′ along with the original diagram Ω.
   Clearly, φ is supported on I whenever supp (∆′ ) ⊆ I. However, the latter condition is
not necessary. For example, the reduction for type 2R described below is supported on
I = {1, 2, 4} while supp (∆′ ) = {1, 2, 3, 4} (in fact, 3 already lies in the support of ∆).
   For each single-cell reduction described in the next two subsections we will start by
specifying a set I on which the given map is supported (in all cases we will have I ⊆
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}) and then work only with I-traces of the vertices of ∆ (rather than full
vertex labels).
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                27

Simplified terminology and notations. The following additional terminology and no-
tations will be used in the description of single-cell reductions in the next two subsections
(and also later in the paper).
     • The single-cell reduction maps described in § 3,4 will always be denoted by φ. The
       initial diagram will be denoted by Ω, the modified diagram by Ω′ , the domain of
       φ (which is a single cell) by F and the replacement diagram of φ by ∆′ . Thus
       symbolically φ : (Ω, F ) → (Ω′ , ∆′ ).
     • The boundary relator of F will often be written in the form r = s (recall that
       formally this denotes the geometric relator with representative r−1 s).
     • The vertices of F will be called old vertices and the vertices in V (∆′ ) \ V (F) will
       be called new vertices.
     • By abuse of notation, for a vertex w we will write w = (a, b, c, . . .) meaning that
       (a, b, c, . . .) is the label of w.
     • A notation like (a, b, ∗) will mean an element of Zn whose first and second coordi-
       nates are a and b, respectively.
     • As already mentioned, in each case we will specify a set I on which φ is supported.
       Each figure in § 3.2, 3.3, 4.1 and 4.2 will depict the I-trace of the replacement
       diagram ∆′ for the corresponding single-cell reduction.
     • Recall that v denotes a chosen maximal vertex of F. For some types, we will either
       specify exactly where v appears in the diagram or at least give some restrictions.
       In these cases, (the labels of) vertices of F which could be equal to v will appear
       in boldface.
     • As before, for any w ∈ Zn by wI we will denote its projection to Z|I| . We will
       define the partial order on the set of labels of V (∆′I ) by setting wI < wI′ if and
       only if w < w′ . This order is well defined since by the choice of I the map w 7→ wI
       is a bijection from the labels of V (∆I ) to the labels of V (∆′I ); however, this order
       may be different from the order induced from Z|I| .
     • As before, we will deal with both ℓ∞ and ℓ1 -norms of vectors in Zn . Since the
       former will be used more frequently, we will often write ∥v∥ instead of ∥v∥∞ .
     • For any diagram Ψ we set ∥Ψ∥ = max{∥v∥ : v ∈ V (Ψ)}.
     • We will refer to the single-cell reductions constructed in § 3,4 using expressions
       of the form n.GA, n.GB, n.ZA and n.ZB where n is an integer between 1 and
       12. Here n denotes the type of the boundary relation of ∂F, the first letter (G or
       Z) distinguishes between the good coordinate and zero coordinate cases, and the
       second letter is A in the case of the row-stabilizer groups (considered in § 3) and
       B for the column-stabilizer groups (considered in § 4).
     • When we say that an integer e is maximal (resp. good, bad), we will mean that e
       is Ω-maximal (resp. Ω-good, Ω-bad) unless we view e as a coordinate of a specific
       vertex (see Definition 2.32 at the end of § 2).


3.2. Single-cell reductions in the good coordinate case. In this subsection we will
describe single-cell reductions in the good coordinate case, separately for each cell type.
Recall our initial conventions: v = (v1 , v2 , . . .) is the chosen maximal vertex of F (which
is interior and maximal for the entire diagram Ω). We set

                                  M = ∥v∥ = ∥F∥ = ∥Ω∥.
28                                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                                  Type 1, GA: l(∂F ) = ([R23 , R12 ] = R13 ),
                                                                           R23
                                       (a + b, b + c)                                              (a + b, b)
                                                                                           L14
                                                 L14
                          R13                                              R23
                                                      (a + b − d, b + c)         (a + b − d, b)
                                                 R13


     (a + b + c, b + c)            (a + b + c − d, b + c)                               R12                R12
                           L14
                                                        R12

                                 R12                                       R23
                                                        (a − d, b + c)             (a − d, b)
                                                                                                  L14
                                                        L14
                                                                           R23
                                         (a, b + c)                                                     (a, b)



                                Figure 6. The first two coordinates are listed

By Observation 3.4 we can assume that v1 is maximal and positive, v4 is good and positive
and l(∂F) ∈ Rrep . In particular, 4 ̸∈ supp (F ), so all vertices of F have the same 4th coor-
dinate, and for simplicity of notation we denote its value by d. Thus, v = (M, v2 , v3 , d, . . .)
where M > d > 0.

  Easy Case: 1 ̸∈ supp (l(∂F)). Since g(v) > 4 and |supp (l(∂F ))| ≤ 4, after acting by
some element of Σn (1), we can assume that 4 ̸∈ supp (l(∂F)) and v4 is still good. Thus,
                                   ±1         ±1
each of the commuting maps CF (R14    ), CF (R41 ) is defined, and by Lemma 2.31 one of
them is a reduction.
   From now on we we will assume that 1 ∈ supp (l(∂F )), so by choosing suitable Rrep ,
we can assume that l(∂F) is one of the relators in Table 1. For each cell type i where we
distinguished subtypes iR and iL we will only describe a reduction for subtype iR, as the
corresponding reduction for subtype iL can be obtained simply by swapping L and R in
all the edge labels.
   Type 1R: l(∂F ) = ([R23 , R12 ] = R13 ). In this case I = {1, 2}. All edge labels in ∂F
commute with L14 . Below we will show that the commuting map CF (L14 ) is a reduction
(see Figure 6)
Claim 3.7. Every vertex of F has a nonnegative first coordinate.
Proof. The vertices of FI are (a, b), (a + b, b), (a + b, b + c), (a + b + c, b + c) and (a, b + c) for
some a, b, c. Since v = (M, ∗), by our assumption one of the numbers a, a + b or a + b + c
equals M . Thus, if some vertex of F has a negative first coordinate, then the difference
between the first coordinates of some pair of vertices of F is larger than M . However,
these differences (up to sign) are b, c and b + c, each of which appears as a coordinate of
some vertex of F and thus cannot exceed M = ∥F∥ in absolute value, a contradiction. □

   Now take any new vertex w′ of φ. We need to show that w′ < v. There exists an old
vertex w (that is, a vertex of F) such that wI = (x, y) and wI′ = (x − d, y). Since x ≥ 0 by
Claim 3.7 and x ≤ M (as x is a coordinate of w), w′ has a non-maximal first coordinate. If
either y = b + c or vI ̸= (a + b + c, b + c), there exists an old vertex u which has a maximal
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                            29


                                     Type 2, GA: l(∂F ) = ([R13 , R21 ] = R23 ).
                                                                                    R13
                                     (a + c, a + b)                                                                         (a, a + b)
                                                               L14
                                                                                                                      L14
                     R23                                                                   R13
                                                         R23         (a + c − d, a + b)          (a − d, a + b)

                         L14          (a + c − d, a + b + c)     R21                                    R21
                                                                                          R13
    (a + c, a + b + c)                                               (a + c − d, b + d)          (a − d, b + d)             R21

                                                                              R24                       R24
                               R21                                                         R13
                                                                       (a + c − d, b)              (a − d, b)
                                                      L14
                                                                                                                L14
                                                                                    R13
                                       (a + c, b)                                                                             (a, b)



                                     Figure 7. Coordinates 1 and 2 are listed.

first coordinate (equal to M ) and agrees with w′ in all other coordinates, so w′ < u and
hence w′ < v.
   Assume now that y = b and vI = (a + b + c, b + c), so a + b + c = M and w′ = (a − d, b)
or (a + b − d, b).
   Subcase 1: |b| < M . Then the first two coordinates of w′ are non-maximal, so w′ < v.
   Subcase 2: b = M . Then a + c = 0 and since both a + b and b + c are ≤ M being
coordinates of F, we must have a = c = 0. Then vI = (M, M ), so w′ < v as v has more
maximal coordinates than w′ .
   Subcase 3: b = −M . Then a + c = 2M , so a = c = M and hence vI = (M, 0)
while wI′ = (M − d, −M ) or (−d, −M ), so w′ and v have the same number of maximal
coordinates, but w′ has more good coordinates, so again w′ < v.
   Thus we proved that φ is a reduction.

   Type 2R: l(∂F ) = ([(R13 , R21 ] = R23 ), I = {1, 2}. We will use the map shown in
Figure 7.
   Let us prove that this map is a reduction. This map produces 7 new vertices, and we
need to check that their I-traces are all < vI . The first coordinate of every vertex of
F is either a or a + c, so by assumption a = M or a + c = M and hence both (M, b)
and (M, a + b) are present among the vertices of FI . Since c is also a coordinate of an
F-vertex, |c| ≤ M , whence a, a + c ≥ 0. Since d is a good positive coordinate, we have
|a + c − d| < M, |a − d| < M . Hence (a + c − d, b) and (a − d, b) are both < (M, b) and
(a + c − d, a + b) and (a − d, a + b) are both < (M, a + b), so (a + c − d, b), (a − d, b),
(a + c − d, a + b) and (a − d, a + b) are all < vI .
   Next observe that b ≤ 0 (for otherwise a+ b > M or a + b +c > M ), whence |b+ d| < M .
Hence both coordinates of the vertices (a − d, b + d) and (a + c − d, b + d) are non-maximal,
so they are also < vI .
   The only remaining new vertex is (a + c − d, a + b + c). Its first coordinate is non-
maximal. Since a + c ≥ 0 and b ≤ 0, the only way a + b + c can be maximal is if either
b = 0 and a + c = M or b = −M and a + c = 0, and in the second case we must
have a = −c = M (since either a or a + c must be maximal). In the first case we have
(a + c − d, a + b + c) = (M − d, M ) < (M, M ) = (a + c, a + b + c), and in the second
30                                                MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                            Type 3, GA: l(∂F ) = ([R21 , R32 ] = R21 ).
(a, a + b, c)                                                                                                      (a, a + b, a + b + c)
                                                        R32
                                   R14
                                                                                                                   R14
          R21           (a − d, b + d, c)                      (a − d, a + b, c)         (a − d, a + b, a + b + c)
                                                  R21                              R32
                                 R24                                                                  R31
                                            R32
                  R14
     (a, b, c)            (a − d, b, c)             (a − d, b + d, b + c + d)            (a − d, a + b, b + c + d)       R31
                                                                                   R21
                           R32                                     R34                                R34

 R32                    (a − d, b, b + c)               (a − d, b + d, b + c)              (a − d, a + b, b + c)
                                             R24                                   R21
                 R14
                                                                                                            R14
(a, b, b + c)                                                                                                        (a, a + b, b + c)
                                                         R21



                          Figure 8. Coordinates 1,2 and 3 are listed.


case we have (a + c − d, a + b + c) = (−d, −M ) < (M, −M ) = (a, b), so we proved that
(a + c − d, a + b + c) < vI .
   Let us now formulate a simple general observation which can be used to prove that a
new vertex is less than v.
Lemma 3.8. Let Ω be a diagram and M = ∥Ω∥. The following hold:
       (a) Let w be a vertex of Ω, let J be a subset of {1, . . . , n}, and assume that |wt | = M
           for some t ∈ J (so in particular ∥w∥ = M ). Let w    e ∈ Zn be such that
             (i) wej = wj for all j ̸∈ J;
            (ii) |wej | < M for all j ∈ J.
           If w′ ∈ Zn is obtained from w  e by a signed permutation of coordinates, then w′ < w.
       (b) Let φ : Ω → Ω′ be a diagram map and assume that every new vertex w′ of φ is
           obtained from some old vertex w as in (a) (for some choice of w).     e Then φ is a
           reduction.
Proof. (a) Conditions (i) and (ii) imply that either ∥w′ ∥ < ∥w∥ or ∥w′ ∥ = ∥w∥, but w′ has
fewer maximal coordinates than w, and in either case w′ < w.
  (b) follows directly from (a) and the definition of reduction (Definition 2.12).       □

   Note that our argument for type 2R was based entirely on Lemma 3.8. Lemma 3.8 will
also be applicable to the majority of the remaining types (in those cases we will simply
check that certain coordinates are non-maximal, skipping the remaining details as they
are completely straightforward).
   Type 3R: l(∂F) = ([R21 , R32 ] = R31 ), I = {1, 2, 3}. We will use the map φ in Figure 8.
   All the vertices of F have the same first coordinate a, so by our assumption a = M .
Since a + b, a + b + c, b and b + c are all coordinates of F, we must have −M ≤ b, b + c ≤ 0.
Since d is good and positive, it follows that |a − d|, |b + d|, |b + c + d| < M , so φ is a
reduction by Lemma 3.8.
   Type 4R: l(∂F ) = [R21 , R31 ], I = {1, 2, 3}. We will use the map in Figure 9. The
justification is completely analogous to type 3.
        ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                                  31

                                             Type 4, GA: l(∂F ) = [R21 , R31 ]
    (a, a + b, c)                                                                                                           (a, a + b, a + c)
                                                                                      R31
                      R14                                                                                         R14

                          (a − d, a + b, c)               (a − d, a + b, a + c − d)             (a − d, a + b, a + c)
                                                  R31                                   R34
                             R24                                         R24                                R24

           R21        (a − d, a + b − d, c)             (a − d, a + b − d, a + c − d)         (a − d, a + b − d, a + c)              R21
                                                  R31                                   R34
                             R21                                         R21                                R21

                            (a − d, b, c)                   (a − d, b, a + c − d)                 (a − d, b, a + c)
                                                  R31                                   R34
                      R14
                                                                                                                  R14
     (a, b, c)                                                                                                                (a, b, a + c)
                                                                                          R31



                                   Figure 9. Coordinates 1,2 and 3 are listed.


                                             Type 5, GA: l(∂F ) = [R12 , L13 ]
     (a + c, b)                                                                                                              (a + b + c, b)
                                                                   L12
                           L14                                                                                 R24


                                 (a + c − d, b)              (a + c − d, b + d)            (a + b + c, b + d)
                                                    R24                             L12
           R13                              R13                          R13                          R13                      R13

                                   (a − d, b)                  (a − d, b + d)                 (a + b, b + d)
                                                    R24                             L12
                    L14                                                                                               R24


       (a, b)                                                                                                                  (a + b, b)
                                                                   L12



                           Figure 10. Only the first two coordinates are listed



   Type 5: l(∂F) = [L12 , R13 ], I = {1, 2}. Write v = (a, b, c, d, ∗). Acting by the signed
permutations x2 7→ x−1                      −1
                      2 and/or x3 7→ x3 if needed, we can assume that both edges at
v are incoming, so l(∂F) is exactly as in Figure 10. The map shown in Figure 10 is a
reduction – the proof is again analogous to type 3.
   Type 6: l(∂F ) = [R12 , R35 ], I = {1, 3}. All edge labels in ∂F commute with L14 . The
commuting map CF (L14 ) is a reduction by the same argument as for type 1.
   Type 7: l(∂F ) = [R21 , R35 ], I = {1, 2, 3}. This case is analogous to (and easier than)
type 4.
   Type 9: l(∂F) = (L21 L−112 R21 = w21 ), I = {1, 2}. The vertices of FI are (a, b), (a, a + b),
(a + b, −a) and (a + b, b), so a = M or a + b = M . We will use one of the 2 maps in
Figure 11 – the first map if a = M and the second map if a + b = M but a ̸= M .
   Since a = M or a + b = M and a, b, a + b are all F-coordinates, it follows that 0 ≤
a, a + b ≤ M , whence |a + b − d|, |a − d| < M .
   Case 1: a = M . In this case the first map in Figure 11 is a reduction by Lemma 3.8.
32                                              MIKHAIL ERSHOV

                             Type 9, GA: l(∂F ) = (L21 L−1
                                                        12 R21 = w21 )
                                      Case 1: a is maximal
                                                        w21
     (a, a + b)        R14                                                                   L24           (a + b, −a)
                                                        w21
                               (a − d, a + b)                             (a + b, d − a)
                                                                                           R14
                               R24
                                                        w21
          R21 (a − d, a + b − d)                                                       (a + b − d, d − a) L21
                               R21                                                  L21


                                   (a − d, b)                             (a + b − d, b)
                    R14                                L12
       (a, b)                                                                                R14            (a + b, b)
                                                       L12


                             Case 2: a + b is maximal, a is not maximal
                                                        w21
     (a, a + b)        L24                                                                                 (a + b, −a)
                                                 w21                                       L14
                               (a, a + b − d)           (a + b − d, −a)



          R21                           R21                L21                                             L21



                                   (a, b − d)          (a + b − d, b − d)           (a + b − d, b)
                    L24                         L12                          L24                     L14
       (a, b)                                                                                               (a + b, b)
                                                       L12



                          Figure 11. The first two coordinates are listed


   Case 2: a + b = M , 0 ≤ a < M . Since a + b = M , we must have b ≥ 0 and hence
|b − d| < M . Since we also assume that |a| < M , the second map in Figure 11 is a
reduction by Lemma 3.8.
   Type 8: l(∂F) = (L12 L−121 R12 = w12 ), I = {1, 2}. The vertices of FI are (a, b), (a, a + b),
(−b, a + b) and (a + b, b), so M is equal to a, a + b or −b.
   Case 1: a + b = M . As in type 9, we have a, a + b ≥ 0 and |a + b − d|, |a − d| < M .
Hence the map in Figure 12 is a reduction by Lemma 3.8.
   Case 2: a = M . In this case we slightly modify the map in Figure 12, changing the
subpath L14 L24 starting at the vertex (a, a + b) by L24 L14 . This changes the new vertex
adjacent to (a, a + b) from (a, a + b − d) to (a − d, a + b). The rest of the argument is
analogous to Case 1.
   Case 3: −b = M . In this case (−b, a + b) is a maximal vertex of FI . But then (a + b, b)
is also a maximal vertex with a maximal second coordinate. Thus we can swap the roles of
the first and second coordinates, in which case we are reduced to type 9 discussed above.
                         −1            −1
   Type 10: l(∂F) = (w12    L21 w12 = R12  ), I = {1, 2}. The maps in this case are shown in
Figure 13.
   The vertices of FI are (a, b), (a + b, b), (b, −a) and (b, −a − b). If v = (b, ∗), that is,
b = M , we use the first map in Figure 13. Since b = M and a + b is an F-coordinate,
a ≤ 0, whence |b − d|, |a + d| < M , and we are done as in type 8 by Lemma 3.8.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                           33


                  Type 8, GA: l(∂F ) = (L12 L−1
                                             21 R12 = w12 ), a + b is maximal
                                                                  w12
     (a + b, b)                                                                                                           (−b, a + b)
                         L14
                                                                                                     L24
                                                    w12
                                (a + b − d, b)               (−b, a + b − d)

           R12                         R12                      L12                                                        L12

                                  (a − d, b)                (a − d, a + b − d)           (a, a + b − d)
                                                  L21                              L14
                  L14
                                                                                                             L24
       (a, b)                                                                                                              (a, a + b)
                                                                  L21



                              Figure 12. The first two coordinates are listed
                                 −1            −1
         Type 10, GA: l(∂F ) = (w12 L21 w12 = R12 ), vI = (b, −a) or (b, −a − b)
     (a + b, b)                                                                                                           (b, −a − b)
                                                                  w12
                          L24             (a + b, b − d)                    (b − d, −a − b)                   L14
                                                                  w12

                                       R12                                                 L21
          R12     (a + d, b − d)                                                                      (b − d, −a − d)      L21
                                                                  w12
                                       R14                                                 L24

                                                                  w12
                        L24                    (a, b − d)                        (b − d, −a)                L14
       (a, b)                                                                                                               (b, −a)
                                                                  w12

                                    −1            −1
            Type 10, GA: l(∂F ) = (w12 L21 w12 = R12 ), vI = (a, b) or (a + b, b)
     (a + b, b)                                                                                                           (b, −a − b)
                                                                   w12
                         L14                                                                                 R24


                                (b, d − a − b)                                            (a + b − d, b)
                                                                   w12
           R12                          R12                                                    L21                         L21

                                  (a − d, b)                                                   (b, d − a)
                                                                   w12
                  L14                                                                                               R24


       (a, b)                                                                                                               (b, −a)
                                                                  w12



                              Figure 13. The first two coordinates are listed

   If v = (∗, b), we use the second map in Figure 13. In this case a, a + b ≥ 0, whence
|a − d|, |a − b − d| < M , and again we are done as in the first case.
                                 −1       −1                        −1
   Type 11R: l(∂F) = (w12 L23 w12   = R13    ) or l(∂F) = (w12 R13 w12 = R23 ), I = {1, 2}.
Note that here we are not specifying the boundary relator in advance and will choose one
of these two relators (both of which lie in the same orbit under Σ(1)+ ) depending on the
labels of edges containing v.
   Initially we only assume that F has type 11R. One of the edge labels at v is a Weyl
generator of the form w1i and the other is a Nielsen generator. After acting by a suitable
34                                              MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                                                      −1    −1
                   Type 11R.1, GA: l(∂F ) = (w12 L23 w12 = R13 ), v = (∗, b)
      (a − c, b)                                                                              (b, c − a)
                                                     w12
                                                                                  R24
                     L14
                               (a − c − d, b)                    (b, c + d − a)
                                                     w12
      R13                        R13                                     L23                        L23
                                                     w12
                                 (a − d, b)                        (b, d − a)
                   L14                                                              R24


        (a, b)                                                                                 (b, −a)
                                                     w12

                                                      −1
                   Type 11R.2, GA: l(∂F ) = (w12 R13 w12 = R23 ), v = (a, ∗)
                                                      w12
     (b − c, −a)                                                                              (a, b − c)


                     R24                                                                L14
                                                      w12
                               (b − c, d − a)                    (a − d, b − c)

      R13                        R13                               R23                        R23
                                                      w12
                                 (b, d − a)                        (a − d, b)
                                                                                    L14
                         R24
       (b, −a)                                                                                  (a, b)
                                                      w12



                 Figure 14. In both diagrams the first two coordinates are listed



element of Σ(1)+ , we can assume that i = 2, supp (F) = {1, 2, 3} and the edge at v labeled
by w12 is incoming. If e is the other edge at v, then supp (e) = {1, 3} or {2, 3}, and we
will consider these 2 cases separately:
      • subtype 11.R.1: supp (e) = {1, 3}.
                                                          −1    −1
        In this case we can assume that l(∂F) = (w12 L23 w12 = R13 ).
      • subtype 11.R.2: supp (e) = {2, 3}.
                                                          −1
        In this case we can assume that l(∂F) = (w12 R13 w12 = R23 ).
   The reduction maps for both subtypes are shown in Figure 14. Note that in subtype
11.R.1 vI = (a, b) or (a − c, b) and in subtype 11.R.2 vI = (a, b) or (a, b − c). The
justification is similar to previous cases.
   Note that we are forced to use different boundary relator representatives for the subtypes
11.R.1 and 11.R.2 because we require that the edge labeled by w12 is incoming at v. The
reason we want to have representatives with the latter property is that it will simplify the
description of double-cell reductions, which we will need to construct for type 11 later in
this section.
                            −1               −1
   Type 12: l(∂F ) = (w12      R31 w12 = R32    ), I = {1, 2, 3}. The vertices of FI are (a, b, c),
(b, −a, c), (b, −a, a + c) and (a, b, a + c). The reduction maps are shown in Figure 15. The
justification is very similar to Type 10.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                     35

                                             −1            −1
                     Type 12, GA: l(∂F ) = (w12 R31 w12 = R32 ), v = (a, b, ∗)
    (a, b, a + c)                                                                              L24               (b, −a, a + c)
                                                                 w12
                            R14             (a − d, b, a + c)            (b, d − a, a + c)
                                                                 w12
                                                     R34                          R34

           R31                           (a − d, b, a + c − d)         (b, d − a, a + c − d)                       R32
                                                                 w12
                                                     R31                    R32
                                                                 w12
                          R14                 (a − d, b, c)                (b, d − a, c)          L24
      (a, b, c)                                                                                                    (b, −a, c)
                                                                 w12

                                            −1            −1
                    Type 12, GA: l(∂F ) = (w12 R31 w12 = R32 ), v = (b, −a, ∗)
    (a, b, a + c)                                                                                                (b, −a, a + c)
                                                                 w12
                          R24
                                                                                                           R14
                                (b − d, −a, a + c)                                 (a, b − d, a + c)
                                                                 w12
           R31                            R31                                           R32                        R32

                                   (a, b − d, c)                                    (b − d, −a, c)
                                                                 w12
                    R24
                                                                                                     R14
      (a, b, c)                                                                                                    (b, −a, c)
                                                                 w12



                            Figure 15. The first three coordinates are listed

3.3. Single-cell reductions for IARn,1 in the zero coordinate case. We start with
a simple observation which will be applicable to many cell types. Its role in the zero
coordinate case will be similar to that of Lemma 3.8 in the good coordinate case.
Lemma 3.9. Let φ : Ω → Ω′ be a diagram map and v a maximal vertex of Ω. The
following hold:
   (a) Let w be a vertex of Ω, and suppose that w′ ∈ Zn is obtained from w by replacing
       one or several Ω-bad coordinates by Ω-good coordinates. Then w′ < w. Hence if
       every new vertex w′ of φ is obtained from some old vertex w in this way, then φ
       is a reduction.
   (b) Let u be an old vertex of φ which agrees with v apart from the j th coordinate for
       some j, and assume that the j th coordinate of v is good (and hence Ω-good as v is
       maximal). Then the j th coordinate of u is Ω-good.
Proof. (a) Let M = ∥Ω∥. By assumption ∥w∥ ≤ M , and for any i such that wi′ ̸= wi
we have then |wi′ | < M , so either ∥w′ ∥ < M = ∥v∥ (which automatically implies that
w′ < v) or ∥w′ ∥ = ∥w∥ = M . But in the latter case for every i such that wi′ ̸= wi , the ith
coordinate of w is bad while the ith coordinate of w′ is good, so by definition w′ < w.
  (b) If the j th coordinate of u is Ω-bad, we can apply (a) with w = u and w′ = v to
conclude that v < u, a contradiction.                                                      □

  For the rest of this subsection we fix Ω, F and v as in Proposition 3.1, and we assume
that we are in the zero coordinate case. By Observation 3.5 we can (and will) assume
36                                                         MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                                    Type 1R, ZA: l(∂F ) = ([R23 , R12 ] = R13 ).
                                                                                               R23
                                         (a + b, b + c, 0)                                                                      (a + b, b, 0)
                                                                                                                         R41
                                                                 R41
                             R13
                                     (a + b, b + c, a + b + c)                (a + b, b + c, a + b)         (a + b, b, a + b)
                                                                       R43                            R23
                                                                                                                          R42
                                            R13
                                                                        R42
                                                                                                            R23
     (a + b + c, b + c, 0)         (a + b + c, b + c, a + b + c)                       (a + b, b + c, a)             (a + b, b, a)        R12
                             R41
                                                           R42           R13
                                                                                                                          R12
                                   R12                                        R12                     R23
                                                  (a + b + c, b + c, a)             (a, b + c, a)                 (a, b, a)
                                                                                                                                R41
                                                                        R41
                                                                                               R23
                                           (a, b + c, 0)                                                                             (a, b, 0)



                                   Figure 16. Coordinates 1,2 and 4 are listed.

that v1 (the first coordinate of v) is good and positive and the fourth coordinate of v is 0.
Thus, v = (v1 , v2 , v3 , 0, ∗) where 0 < v1 < M = ∥v∥.
   Type 1R: l(∂F ) = ([R23 , R12 ] = R13 ), I = {1, 2, 4}. We consider two cases. If the
third coordinate c (which is the same for all vertices of F) is good, we can simply use the
commuting reduction CF (R43 ). So let us assume that c is bad and use the map shown in
Figure 16.
   Each new vertex coincides with one of the vertices of F in all coordinates except the
fourth one, and the fourth coordinate changes from 0 to a, a + b or a + b + c, so by
Lemma 3.9(a) it suffices to show that a, a + b and a + b + c are all good. Since c is bad,
a + b and a + b + c are both good or both bad by Observation 2.34. Also since v has a
good first coordinate, at least one of the integers a, a + b and a + b + c must be good. So
we just need to rule out two possibilities:
     (i) a is good and a + b, a + b + c are bad;
    (ii) a is bad and a + b, a + b + c are good.
If (i) occurs, vI = (a, b, 0) or (a, b + c, 0). But this is impossible since (a + b, b, 0) and
(a + b, b + c, 0) are also vertices of FI and we have (a, b, 0) < (a + b, b, 0) and (a, b + c, 0) <
(a + b, b + c, 0) since a is good and a + b is bad.
   Suppose now that (ii) occurs. If vI = (a+b, b, 0) or (a+b, b+c, 0), we get a contradiction
as in case (i). The only remaining possibility is that vI = (a + b + c, b + c, 0). Since a + b + c
is good while a is bad, b + c must be good. But then (a + b + c, b + c, 0) < (a, b, 0), a
contradiction.
  Type 2R: l(∂F ) = ([R13 , R21 ] = R23 ), I = {1, 2, 4}. The argument is similar to, but
easier than type 1. If c is good, the commuting map CF (R43 ) is a reduction, so assume
that c is bad. In this case we use the map shown in Figure 17. As with type 1, all we
need to show is that a and a + c (the only possible values of the fourth coordinates of new
vertices) are good. Since c is bad, they are both good or both bad. And they cannot be
both bad since then none of the vertices of F has a good first coordinate.
   Types 3R, 4R and 7R: l(∂F ) = ([R21 , R32 ] = R31 ), [R21 , R31 ] or [R21 , R35 ], I = {2, 3, 4}.
In these cases all the edge labels of F commute with R41 , and all the vertices of F have
        ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                               37


                                   Type 2R, ZA: l(∂F ) = ([R13 , R21 ] = R23 ).
                                                                                          R13
                                        (a + c, a + b, 0)                                                                    (a, a + b, 0)
                                                                                                                      R41
                                            R41
                           R23                                       R13                            R43
                                        (a + c, a + b, a + c)                (a, a + b, a + c)                 (a, a + b, a)
                                            R23
                                                                                       R21

   (a + c, a + b + c, 0)           (a + c, a + b + c, a + c)                   (a, b, a + c)                          R21           R21
                            R41
                                                  R21          R13                                    R43

                                  R21                                R43                            R13
                                          (a + c, b, a + c)                    (a + c, b, a)                     (a, b, a)
                                                                                                                              R41
                                                  R41
                                                                                          R13
                                          (a + c, b, 0)                                                                        (a, b, 0)



                             Figure 17. Only coordinates 1,2 and 4 are listed.

                                           Type 5, ZA: l(∂F ) = [R12 , L13 ]
     (a + b, b)                                                                                                       (a + b + c, b)
                                                                 L13
                           R21
                                                                                                                R21
                                                  R23
                                  (a + b, −a)               (a + b, −(a + c))          (a + b + c, −(a + c))
                                                                                 L13
           R12                          w12                            w12                        w12                   R12

                                   (a, a + b)                 (a + c, a + b)             (a + c, a + b + c)
                                                  L13                            L23
                                                                                                                L21
                           L21
       (a, b)                                                                                                           (a + c, b)
                                                                  L13



                                 Figure 18. The first two coordinates are listed

a as the first coordinate (which is good by assumption), so the commuting map CF (R41 )
is a reduction.
   Type 5: l(∂F) = [L12 , R13 ], I = {1, 2}. The map φ used for this type is quite different
from the ones we have seen so far, as index 4 does not appear not only in the support of
φ, but even in the support of its replacement diagram. Write v = (a, b, c, 0, ∗). As in type
5.GA, we can assume that both edges at v are incoming, in which case the other three
vertices of F are (a + b, b, c, 0, ∗), (a + b + c, b, c, 0, ∗) and (a + c, b, c, 0, ∗).
   If either b (resp. c) is good, the commuting map CF (R42 ) (resp. CF (R43 )) is a reduction,
so assume that b and c are both bad. Since a is good (being the first coordinate of v), the
numbers a + b, a + c and a + b + c are all good as well by Observation 2.34. We shall use
the map in Figure 18. Each of the new vertices is obtained from one of the vertices of F
by replacing the bad second coordinate b by a good value (−a, a + b, −(a + c) or a + b + c),
so this map is a reduction by Lemma 3.9(a).
   Type 6: l(∂F ) = [R12 , R35 ], I = {1, 3, 4}. We will use the map shown in Figure 19. The
first coordinates of the vertices of F are equal to a and a + b, and both must be good by
38                                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                                          Type 6, ZA: l(∂F ) = [R12 , R35 ]
     (a, 0, c + e)                                                                                                   (a + b, 0, c + e)
                                                              R12
                           L41
                                                                                                               L41
                                                                              L42
                                 (a, −a, c + e)          (a + b, −a, c + e)         (a + b, −(a + b), c + e)
                                                  R12
            R35                         R35                         R35                         R35                     R35
                                                                              L42
                                   (a, −a, c)              (a + b, −a, c)             (a + b, −(a + b), c)
                                                  R12
                     L41
                                                                                                        L41
       (a, 0, c)                                                                                                       (a + b, 0, c)
                                                               R12



                                  Figure 19. Coordinates 1,3 and 4 are listed

Lemma 3.9(b). Each new vertex is obtained from a vertex of F by replacing 0 by −a or
−(a + b) in the fourth coordinate, and hence the map is a reduction by Lemma 3.9(a).
   Type 8: l(∂F) = (L12 L−1    21 R12 = w12 ), I = {1, 2, 4}. The vertices of FI are (a, b, 0),
(a, a + b, 0), (−b, a + b, 0) and (a + b, b, 0). We will use one of the two maps in Figure 20.
By Lemma 3.9(a), the first map is a reduction whenever a and a + b are both good, and
the second map is a reduction whenever a and b are both good. Let us prove that one of
these two cases must occur. Indeed, as before, at least two of the numbers a, b, a + b are
good, so we only need to rule out the possibility that b and a + b are good and a is bad.
If the latter case occurs, vI = (−b, a + b, 0) or (a + b, b, 0) (since the first coordinate of v
must be good); on the other hand, both of these vertices are < (a, b, 0) since a is bad, a
contradiction.
   Type 9: l(∂F) = (L21 L−1    12 R21 = w21 ), I = {1, 2, 4}. The vertices of FI are (a, b, 0),
(a + b, b, 0), (a + b, −a, 0) and (a, a + b, 0). If a and a + b are both good, the map in
Figure 21 is a reduction. Suppose now that a or a + b is bad. By our assumptions FI
must have a maximal vertex with a good first coordinate and bad second coordinate. Thus
(a + b, −a, 0) or (a, a + b, 0) is maximal, and since these two vertices differ by a signed
permutation of coordinates, they are both maximal. Therefore FI (and hence F) has a
maximal vertex with a good second coordinate, so we can switch the roles of the first and
second coordinates, thereby reducing to Type 8.
   Types 10-12: The reduction maps for these types are similar to the ones we used in the
good coordinate case. The map for type 12 is shown on Figure 22 – we emphasize the
map for this type since it will be used for construction of double-cell reductions.
3.4. Conclusion of the proof. We start by constructing double-cell reductions for cer-
tain types of galleries of length 2. As earlier in this section, we assume that v is an interior
maximal vertex of some diagram Ω and the first coordinate of v is positive (so that we
can refer to cell types as before).
   Recall that m(v), g(v) and z(v) denote the number of maximal, good and zero coordi-
nates of v, respectively.
Lemma 3.10. Let ∆ be a gallery of length 2 at v with cells F1 and F2 , and let e ∈
E(F1 ) ∩ E(F2 ) be an edge containing v. In each of the following cases Ω admits a ∆-
reduction which eliminates e:
   ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                        39

                             Type 8, ZA: l(∂F ) = (L12 L−1
                                                        21 R12 = w12 )
                                  Case 1: a and a + b are good
                                                          w12
(a + b, b, 0)                                                                                   R42             (−b, a + b, 0)
                R41                                       w12
                                (a + b, b, a + b)                          (−b, a + b, a + b)


                                 R42                                                  R41
                                                          w12
       R12      (a + b, b, a)                                                                (−b, a + b, a)       L12
                                 R12                                                   L12


                      R41           (a, b, a)                                (a, a + b, a)            R41
                                                          L21
  (a, b, 0)                                                                                                     (a, a + b, 0)
                                                          L21


                                            Case 2: a and b are good
                                                          w12
(a + b, b, 0)                                                                                                   (−b, a + b, 0)

                 R42                                w12                                      R41
                                  (a + b, b, b)            (−b, a + b, b)



       R12                               R12                 L12                                                  L12



                                                                              R42
                      R42           (a, b, b)              (a, a + b, b)               (a, a + b, −a) R
                                                    L21                                                 41

  (a, b, 0)                                                                                                     (a, a + b, 0)
                                                          L21



                            Figure 20. Coordinates 1, 2 and 4 are listed

                             Type 9, ZA: l(∂F ) = (L21 L−1
                                                        12 R21 = w21 )
                                                          w21
(a, a + b, 0)                                                                                                   (a + b, −a, 0)


                 L41                                                                         L42
                                                    w21
                                  (a, a + b, a)           (a + b, −a, a)

       R21                               R21                 L21                                                  L21

                                    (a, b, a)              (a + b, b, a)              (a + b, b, a + b)
                                                    L12                       L42
                      L41                                                                                 L41


  (a, b, 0)                                                                                                      (a + b, b, 0)
                                                          L12



                            Figure 21. Coordinates 1, 2 and 4 are listed


(1) g(v) ≥ 7, F1 and F2 both have type 2R or both have type 2L, and e has label Rj1
    or Lj1 for some j;
(2) g(v) ≥ 7, F1 and F2 both have type 5, and e has label R1j for some j;
(3) g(v) ≥ 7, F1 has type 5, F2 has type 6R and e has label R1j for some j;
(4) g(v) ≥ 7, F1 and F2 both have type 11L and e has label w1j for some j;
(5) z(v) ≥ 7, ∥v∥∞ > 1, F1 and F2 both have type 2, and e has label R1j for some j;
40                                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

                                                            −1            −1
                                    Type 12, ZA: l(∂F ) = (w12 R31 w12 = R32 )
     (a, b, a + c, 0)                                                                                 (b, −a, a + c, 0)
                                                            w12

                        R41                                                                     R42
                                    (a, b, a + c, a)                    (b, −a, a + c, a)
                                                            w12
              R31                            R31                           R32                           R32

                                      (a, b, c, a)                        (b, −a, c, a)
                                                            w12

                              R41                                                         R42
       (a, b, c, 0)                                                                                     (b, −a, c, 0)
                                                            w12



                               Figure 22. The first three coordinates are listed

     (6) z(v) ≥ 7, ∥v∥∞ > 1, F1 and F2 both have type 12, and e has label w1j for some j.
Proof. By Proposition 3.1, in each case there exists an Fi -reduction φi for i = 1, 2, and
we only need to check that φ1 and φ2 can be made compatible at e. Below we will give a
detailed argument for case (1); the other 5 cases can be handled similarly.
   First, without loss of generality we can assume that F1 and F2 both have type 2R.
Since g(v) ≥ 7, we have |supp (∆)| ≤ 6 < g(v). Arguing as in the proof of Lemma 3.4,
after acting by a suitable element of Σ+n (1) (which does not change the cell types), we can
assume that v4 is good and positive, 4 ̸∈ supp (∆) (so in particular, j ̸= 4) and the label
of e is R21 .
   We can now construct single-cell reductions φi at Fi for i = 1, 2, as in § 3.1, such that
in both cases both side edges at e are labeled by L14 and point away from e. Note that
the replacement diagrams for φ1 and φ2 may not be identical to the one in Figure 7 – for
instance, we only know that supp (Fi ) = {1, 2, ki } for some ki ̸∈ {1, 2, 4}, and it is possible
that k1 ̸= k2 . However, an easy verification shows that if Gi is the side-cell at e for φi ,
then supp (Gi ) = {1, 2, 4} and the boundary label of Gi is exactly as in Figure 7. Hence the
boundary labels of G1 and G2 are mirror images of each other, and therefore the single-cell
reductions φ1 and φ2 are compatible at e, as desired.                                          □

  We are now ready to prove that the row-stabilizer group IARn,1 is finitely presented for
n ≥ 26. First we claim that it suffices to prove the following proposition.
Proposition 3.11. Let n ≥ 26, let v be an interior maximal vertex of some diagram Ω,
and assume that either ∥v∥∞ > 1 or ∥v∥1 > 9. Then v is removable, that is, Ω admits a
full reduction which eliminates v.
   Indeed, there are only finitely many elements of Zn of ℓ∞ -norm 1. Therefore, combining
Proposition 3.11 and Lemma 2.15 applied with B = {w ∈ Zn : ∥w∥ = 1}, we deduce that
IARn,1 is finitely presented.
   The reason we are not restricting ourselves to vertices v with ∥v∥∞ > 1 in Proposi-
tion 3.11 and also allow some vertices of ℓ∞ -norm 1 is that we will need Proposition 3.11
in this form to prove finite presentability of IARn,d for d > 1.

Proof of Proposition 3.11. Since n > 25, we must have m(v) > 9 or g(v) > 8 or z(v) > 8.
We consider the 3 cases accordingly.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                  41

   Case 1: m(v) > 9. Let ∆ be any gallery at v of length ≤ 3. By Observation 3.3(ii)
we have |supp (∆)| ≤ 8. Since m(v) > 9, there exist distinct i, j ̸∈ supp (∆) such that vi
and vj are both maximal. Hence by Lemma 2.31 one of the commuting maps C∆ (x) with
        ±1    ±1
x ∈ {Rij   , Rji } is a ∆-reduction. Any such reduction decreases the degree of v, so after
finitely many steps v will be eliminated.
   Recall that by our assumptions either ∥v∥∞ > 1 or ∥v∥1 > 9. If ∥v∥∞ = 1, then every
nonzero coordinate of v is maximal and m(v) = ∥v∥1 > 9, so Case 1 occurs. Thus from
now on we can assume that ∥v∥∞ > 1. This observation is not essential for Case 2, but
will be used in Case 3.
   Case 2: g(v) > 8. The proof in this case is considerably more involved and will be
divided into 3 steps. For brevity, we will say that a cell F containing v is essential if
1 ∈ supp (F ).
   Step 1: We start by performing a single-cell reduction in the good coordinate case at
every essential cell F containing to v (recall that such reductions have been described
in § 3.1). As one can see from Table 1 (see § 3.1), some relation types never arise as
side-cells, and in the new diagram all essential cells containing v will have type 1, 2, 5, 6
or 11. Moreover, after another round of single-cell reductions at cells of type 1R, 2R, 6R
and 11R, we can assume that the only remaining essential cell types are 1L, 2L, 5, 6L and
11L. Furthermore, it is easy to check that every cell F containing v which arises after the
reductions described in the table has the following property (P):

   (P) If e is any edge of F such that 1 ∈ supp (e), then F has an edge e′ (possibly equal
       to e) which contains v and such that l(e′ ) = l(e).

   Step 2: We will now explain how to eliminate the remaining cells containing v. In the
discussion below by a cell we will always mean a cell containing v. All the subsequent
steps will only involve double-cell and triple-cell reductions, so the total number of cells will
never go up for the rest of the reduction process, and moreover the process is guaranteed
to terminate after sufficiently many triple-cell reductions.
   Recall that after Step 1 we are left with cells of types 1L, 2L, 5, 6L and 11L as well
as non-essential cells. First observe that w1i only appears as an edge label in type 11L,
and by property (P) any cell of type 11L must have an edge labeled w1i and containing
v. Thus, if there exists at least one cell of type 11L, there must be two such cells F1 , F2
sharing an edge e labeled w1i and containing v. By Lemma 3.10(4) there exists a double-
cell reduction which removes e. The side-cells that get canceled during this double-cell
reduction have type 11L, and the non-canceled side-cells have type 5. Therefore, applying
this operation several times we can eliminate all cells of type 11L.
   Next we use a similar argument to eliminate all cells of type 2L and then all cells of
type 5. In the case of type 2L we use the fact that these are the only remaining cells
with edge labels Ri1 or Li1 , so we can apply Lemma 3.10(1). Once cells of type 2L are
eliminated, cells of type 5 are the only remaining cells with labels R1i and we can apply
Lemma 3.10(2).
   Step 3: We now arrive at a diagram where all essential cells at v have type 1L or 6L.
For any such cell F , all edge labels of F will commute with R1i with i ̸∈ supp (F ), so as
in case 1, we can apply a triple-cell reduction to any gallery of length 3 (or a double-cell
reduction if deg (v) = 2).
42                                    MIKHAIL ERSHOV

   Note that after this reduction two cells of types 5 and/or 6R, sharing an edge R1i , will
appear; however, this is not a problem. Indeed, By Lemma 3.10(2) we can use a double-
cell reduction to eliminate these two cells (and hence also the above edge R1i ), thereby
producing a diagram where all cells again have type 1L or 6L, but the total number of
cells is 1 fewer than at the start of Step 3. Therefore, by repeating Step 3 sufficiently
many times, we can eliminate all cells at v (and hence v itself). This completes the proof
in Case 2.
   Case 3: z(v) > 8. Recall that we are also assuming that ∥v∥∞ > 1, so Lemma 3.10(5)(6)
is applicable. The overall reduction procedure in this case is similar to (but substantially
easier than) Case 2.
   First, after two rounds of single-cell reductions we will be left with essential cells of
type 2, 4, 7, 12. The only remaining cells containing edges with labels w1i or wi1 are those
of type 12, and these can be eliminated using double-cell reductions by Lemma 3.10(5).
Similarly by Lemma 3.10(6) we can eliminate all cells of type 2 as they are the only
remaining ones with edges labeled R1i or L1i .
   At this point we are left with only cells of type 4 and 7 and non-essential cells. Note
that in the zero coordinate case, single-cell reductions at cells of type 4 and 7 may only
produce side cells of type 4 and 7. Moreover, all edges in a cell of type 4 or 7 commute with
Ri1 for any i. Therefore, using commuting triple-cell reductions of the form C(Ri1 )(for a
suitable index i), we can eliminate all the remaining cells at v.                          □

                   4. The column-stabilizer subgroup for d = 1
   In this section we prove finite presentability of the column-stabilizer group IACn,1 for
n ≥ 26. The proof is quite similar to the case of IARn,1 , and we will omit parts of the
argument which are identical or analogous to the case of IARn,1 . Lemmas 3.8 and 3.9
remain valid for IACn,1 (the proof remains the same).
   The single-cell reductions for IACn,1 will have almost the same edge labelings as those
for IARn,1 , although the roles of the good coordinate and zero coordinate cases will be
swapped, that is, the edge labelings used in the good coordinate case for IARn,1 will often
work in the zero coordinate case for IACn,1 and vice versa.
   However, the vertex labels in the case of IACn,1 will be very different (since IACn,1 and
IARn,1 act differently on Zn ), and therefore we will usually need a new argument to prove
that a given single-cell map is a reduction.
   Once the single-cell reductions have been constructed, the remainder of the proof (elim-
ination of an interior maximal vertex of sufficiently large norm) is mostly similar to the
case of IARn,1 , but substantial extra work in the good coordinate case will be needed. It
will be described in § 4.3.
   As with IARn,1 , we start by presenting the summary table of single-cell reductions,
followed by their individual descriptions.



4.1. Single-cell reductions for IACn,1 in the good coordinate case.
  We will use the same notations and make the same basic assumptions as in the good
coordinate case for IARn,1 . Thus, v ∈ V (F) is a chosen interior maximal vertex, M =
∥F∥ = ∥v∥, and we assume that v = (M, v2 , v3 , d, ∗) where M > d > 0, that is, d is good
and positive.
      ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                               43

                             Table 2. Single-cell maps for the group IACn,1 .

                                                      good coordinate case                     zero coordinate case
      type            relation                      side edges             side cells      side edges  side cells
       1R        [R23 , R12 ] = R13                                            2, 7           L14         5, 6L
       1L        [L23 , L12 ] = L13                                            2, 7           R14         5, 6R
       2R        [R13 , R21 ] = R23              R41 or L41                   2, 4, 7         L14       2L, 5, 6L
       2L        [L13 , L21 ] = L23              R41 or L41                   2, 4, 7         R14      2R, 5, 6R
        3        [R21 , R32 ] = R31                                            4, 7                        2, 6
        4         [R21 , R31 ] = 1                    L41 , L42                3, 4                          2
        5          [R12 , L13 ] = 1                                            2, 9         L21 , R21  1L, 5, 6R
       6R         [R12 , R35 ] = 1                                             2, 7           L14         5, 6L
       6L          [L12 , R35 ] = 1                                            2, 7           R14         5, 6R
       6′ R       [R12 , R32 ] = 1                                             2, 7           L14         5, 6L
       6′ L        [L12 , R32 ] = 1                                            2, 7           R14         5, 6R
        7         [R21 , R35 ] = 1               R41 or L41                    4, 7                        2, 6
        7′         [R21 , L23 ] = 1              R41 or L41                    4, 7                        2, 6
        8       L12 L−1
                      21 R12 = w12                                           2, 4, 12                 1, 2, 5, 6′ , 11
        9       L21 L−1
                      12 R21 = w21                                        2, 3, 4, 6′ , 12            1, 2, 5, 6′ , 11
                  −1                −1
       10       w12 R21 w12 = R12                                            2, 3, 12                    1, 2, 11
                  −1
      11L       w12  R13 w12 = L−1 23                                      2, 6, 7, 12             −1
                                                                                            L14 , R24   5, 6, 11R
                  −1               −1                                                              −1
      11R       w12 L13 w12 = R23                                          2, 6, 7, 12      R14 , L24   5, 6, 11L
                  −1                −1
       12       w12  R31 w12 = R32                  R41 , R42                4, 7, 12                 1, 2, 5, 6′ , 11


                                Type 1R, GB: l(∂F ) = ([R23 , R12 ] = R13 ).
                                                                                         R23
                                    (a, b − a, a + c − b)                                                                  (a, b − a, c)
                                                                                                                     R41
                                                              R41
                       R13
                              (a − d, b − a, a + c − b − d)                (a − d, b − a, a + c − b)         (a − d, b − a, c)
                                                                    R43                                R23
                                      R13
                                                                                                                        R42
                                                             R42
                                                                                                 R23
   (a, b − a, c − b)          (a − d, b − a, c − b)          (a − d, b + d − a, a + c − b − d)           (a − d, b + d − a, c) R12
                       R41
                                              R42           R13
                                                                                                                   R12
                              R12                                  R12                         R23
                                    (a − d, b + d − a, c − b)              (a − d, b, c − b)            (a − d, b, c)
                                                                                                                         R41
                                                                   R41
                                                                                       R23
                                        (a, b, c − b)                                                                         (a, b, c)



                             Figure 23. The first three coordinates are listed.

  Type 1R: l(∂F) = ([R23 , R12 ] = R13 ), I = {1, 2, 3}. We will use the map shown in
Figure 23.
44                                                  MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                              Type 2R, GB: l(∂F ) = ([R13 , R21 ] = R23 ).
                                                                                 R13
                                   (a − b, b + c − a)                                                       (a − b, c)
                                                                                                    R41
                                        R41
                      R23                                   R13                        R43
                                   (a − b − d, b + c − a)         (a − b − d, c − d)         (a − b − d, c)
                                        R23


     (a − b, c − a)                (a − b − d, c − a)                      R21                      R21           R21
                       R41
                                              R21

                             R21                            R13                        R43
                                       (a − d, c − a)               (a − d, c − d)             (a − d, c)
                                                                                                            R41
                                              R41
                                                                               R13
                                       (a, c − a)                                                             (a, c)



                               Figure 24. Coordinates 1 and 3 are listed


   The first coordinate of every vertex of F is a, so we must have a = M . By Lemma 3.8(b),
to prove that the map is a reduction it suffices to show that |M − d| < M , |M − b − d| < M
and |M +c−b−d| < M . The latter follows from the facts that M > d > 0 and b, b−M, c−b
and M + c − b are all F-coordinates and hence cannot exceed M in absolute value.
   Type 2R: l(∂F ) = ([R13 , R21 ] = R23 ), I = {1, 3}. We will use the map φ in Figure 24.
Thus, M = a or M = a − b. In both cases we deduce that |a − d|, |c − d|, |a − b − d| < M
similarly to type 1. If M = a − b, these inequalities are sufficient to prove that φ is a
reduction using Lemma 3.8(a). Suppose now that M = a and a − b ̸= M (whence a − b is
non-maximal). Lemma 3.8(a) is still applicable to the majority of new vertices of φ, and
the only possible exception is the vertex w with wI = (a − b − c, b − d) in the case where
a − b − c is maximal. But the latter is only possible if a = b = c = M , in which case
wI = (−M, b − d) < (a, c), so w < v as desired.
   Types 3R, 6R, 7: All the edge labels of F commute with R41 . In addition, all vertices
of F have non-negative first coordinate (this can be proved exactly as for type 1.GA).
                                    −1
Therefore, the commuting map CF (R41   ) is a reduction.
                                                                                      −1
   Type 4: l(∂F) = [R21 , R31 ], I = {1, 2}. Unlike type 3R, we cannot use CF (R41       ) since
the vertex of F opposite v may have negative first coordinate. Instead we will use the
map φ in Figure 25.
   Write v = (a, b, c, d, ∗), so a = M . As in types 5.GA and 5.ZA we can assume that both
edges at v are incoming, so the other vertices of FI are as in Figure 25. Since a−b, a−c, b, c
are all F-coordinates, we have 0 ≤ a − b, a − c, b, c ≤ M whence |a − d|, |b − d|, |a − c − d| <
M . Lemma 3.8(a) is applicable to the majority of new vertices of φ except possibly
(a − b, b − d, ∗) in the case a − b = M and (a − b − c, b − d, ∗) in the case |a − b − c| = M .
We claim in both cases these vetrices are < (a, b, ∗), which would finish the proof.
   Recall that a = M . Hence if a − b = M , we have b = 0, whence (a − b, b − d) =
(M, −d) < (M, 0) = (a, b). Also b, c ≥ 0, so |a − b − c| = M forces b = c = 0 or b = c = M .
In the former case we have (a − b − c, b − d) = (M, −d) < (M, 0) = (a, b), and in the latter
case (a − b − c, b − d) = (−M, M − d) < (M, M ) = (a, b), as desired.
        ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                           45


                                          Type 4, GB: l(∂F ) = [R21 , R31 ]
     (a − c, b)                                                                                                       (a − b − c, b)
                                                              R21
                                                                                                         L42
                    L41
                                (a − c − d, b)          (a − c − d, b − d)           (a − b − c, b − d)
                                                 L42                           R21
           R31                          R31                         R31                       R31                       R31

                                  (a − d, b)              (a − d, b − d)               (a − b, b − d)
                                                 L42                           R21
                                                                                                               L42
                          L41
       (a, b)                                                                                                           (a − b, b)
                                                              R21



                                Figure 25. The first two coordinates are listed


                                          Type 5, GB: l(∂F ) = [R12 , L13 ]
    (a, b − a, c)                                                                                                    (a, b − a, c − a)
                                                              L13
                          R21
                                                                                                               R21
                                                 R23
                                 (b, b − a, c)         (b, b − a, b + c − a)         (b, b − a, c − a)
                                                                               L13
           R12                          w12                         w12                       w12                       R12

                                 (a − b, b, c)         (a − b, b, b + c − a)         (a − b, b, c − a)
                                                 L13                           L23
                                                                                                               L21
                          L21
      (a, b, c)                                                                                                        (a, b, c − a)
                                                              L13



                            Figure 26. The first three coordinates are listed


   Type 5: l(∂F) = [L12 , R13 ], I = {1, 2, 3}. The map φ in this case is shown in Figure 26.
Note that, similarly to type 5.ZA, index 4 does not lie in the support of the replacement
diagram of φ.
   As with type 4, we can assume that v = (a, b, c, ∗) and both edges at v are incoming.
Since v is maximal and a = M > 0, we must have b, c > 0. This ensures that |a − b| < M
and either |b + c − a| < M or a = b = c = M . If |b + c − a| < M , all the new vertices are
smaller than v by Lemma 3.8. And if a = b = c = M , then vI = (a, b, c) has 3 maximal
coordinates, while wI has at most 2 maximal coordinates for any new vertex w. In both
cases φ is a reduction.
   Type 8: l(∂F ) = (L12 L−1
                           21 R12 = w12 ), I = {1, 2}. We will use the map shown in
Figure 27. The vertices of FI are (a, b), (a − b, b), (a − b, a), (a, b − a). Thus a = M or
a − b = M . One can prove that the map in Figure 27 is a reduction similarly to type 9GA.
   Type 9: l(∂F ) = (L21 L−1 12 R21 = w21 ), I = {1, 2}. The vertices of FI are (a, b), (a, b −
a), (b, b − a), (a − b, b). Thus a = M , b = M or a − b = M . If b = M or a − b = M ,
then the second coordinate of v is maximal (regardless of which of these 4 vertices equals
v). In these cases we are reduced to type 8 by swapping the roles of the first and second
coordinates.
46                                               MIKHAIL ERSHOV

                             Type 8, GB: l(∂F ) = (L12 L−1
                                                        21 R12 = w12 )
                                                          w12
      (a, b − a)                                                                              R42            (a − b, a)
                   R41                                    w12
                                (a − d, b − a)                              (a − b, a − d)

                                       R42                                    R41
                                                          w12
            R12               (a − d, b + d − a)                        (a − b − d, a − d)                   L12

                                       R12                                    L12

                                  (a − d, b)                                (a − b − d, b)
                     R41                                  L21                                          R41
        (a, b)                                                                                               (a − b, b)
                                                          L21



                           Figure 27. Only coordinates 1 and 2 are listed

                             Type 9, GB: l(∂F ) = (L21 L−1
                                                        12 R21 = w21 )
                                                          w21
      (a − b, b)                                                                                             (b, b − a)


                   L41                                                                       L42
                                                   w21
                                (a − b − d, b)             (b, b + d − a)

           R21                         R21                   L21                                             L21

                                  (a − d, b)             (a − d, b + d − a)           (a − d, b − a)
                                                 L12                           L42
                     L41                                                                               L41


        (a, b)                                                                                               (a, b − a)
                                                         L12



                             Figure 28. Coordinates 1 and 2 are listed

  Thus, we only need to consider the case a = M . In this case we use the map in Figure 28.
One can prove that this map is a reduction similarly to type 8.
                          −1
   Type 10: l(∂F) = (w12     R12 w12 = L−1
                                        21 ), I = {1, 2}. The vertices of FI are (a, b), (b, −a), (b−
a, −a) and (a, b − a). If a = M , the reduction map is shown in Figure 29. In the remaining
cases (M = b or b − a) the map is constructed similarly, but will be simpler as all the side
cells will be quadrilaterals.
                         −1
  Type 11: l(∂F) = (w12     R13 w12 = R23 ), I = {1, 2, 3}. The vertices of FI are (a, b, c), (−c, b, a),
(−c, b − a, a) and (a, b − a, c). If a = M , the reduction map is shown in Figure 30. In the
remaining case M = −b the diagram is constructed similarly, but will be simpler, as in
type 10.
                         −1
   Type 12: l(∂F) = (w12    R31 w12 = R32 ), I = {1, 2}. The reduction map in this case
is similar to (but simpler than) those for types 10 and 11, as all the side cells will be
quadrilaterals.

4.2. Single-cell reductions for IACn,1 in the zero coordinate case.
  As in the zero coordinate case for IARn,1 , we will assume that v is an interior maximal
vertex of F, v1 is good and positive and v4 = 0. As before, we also set M = ∥v∥ = ∥F∥.
        ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                  47

                                     −1
             Type 10, GB: l(∂F ) = (w12 R12 w12 = L−1
                                                   21 ), vI = (a, b) or (a, b − a)
      (a, b − a)                                                                                (b − a, −a)
                                                   w12
                     R41        (a − d, b − a)                  (b − a, d − a)           R42
                                                   w12
                                        R12                       L21

            R12                 (a − d, b − d)                  (b − d, d − a)                   L21
                                                   w12
                                        R42                             R41

                       R41        (a − d, b)                      (b, d − a)        R42
                                                   w12
        (a, b)                                                                                    (b, −a)
                                                   w12



                              Figure 29. Coordinates 1 and 2 are listed

                                             −1
                     Type 11, GB: l(∂F ) = (w12 R13 w12 = R23 ), v = (a, ∗, c)
     (a, b, c − a)                                                                 R42         (−b, a, c − a)
                                                   w12
                     R41                           w12
                               (a − d, b, c − a)              (−b, a − d, c − a)

                                        R13                             R23
                                                   w12
            R13                (a − d, b, c − d)              (−b, a − d, c − d)                       R23

                                        R43                             R43
                                                   w12
                       R41       (a − d, b, c)                  (−b, a − c, c)       R42
                                                   w12
       (a, b, c)                                                                                 (−b, a, c)




                           Figure 30. The first three coordinates are listed


  The majority of reduction maps described below will have side edges labeled by R14 or
L14 .
   Type 1R: l(∂F) = ([R23 , R12 ] = R13 ), I = {2, 3, 4}. All edge labels commute with L14 .
In addition, all vertices of F have the same first coordinate, which by assumption is good.
Therefore, the commuting map CF (L14 ) is a reduction.
   Type 2R: l(∂F) = ([R13 , R21 ] = R23 ), I = {1, 3, 4}. If b is good, the commuting map
CF (L24 ) is a reduction. And if b is bad, then a and a+b are both good by Observation 2.34
(since one of them must be good) and hence the map in Figure 31 is a reduction by
Lemma 3.9(a).
                                     −1
   Type 3R: l(∂F) = [R32 , R21 ]R31     , I = {1, 2, 4}. All vertices of F have the same third
coordinate c. If c is good, the commuting map CF (L34 ) is a reduction, so assume now
that c is bad. We claim that the map in Figure 32 is a reduction. By Lemma 3.9(a), it
suffices to show that a, a + b and a − c are all good.
   The vertices of FI are (a − c, b, 0), (a, b, 0), (a + b, b, 0), (a + b, b + c, 0) and (a − c, b + c, 0).
If vI is one of the first 3 vertices, a − c, a and a + b are good by Lemma 3.9(b). And if v
is one of the last 2, Lemma 3.9(b) yields that a − c and a + b are good. Since c is bad, we
conclude that a = (a − c) + c is also good.
48                                                             MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                                      Type 2, ZB: l(∂F ) = ([R13 , R21 ] = R23 ).
                                                                                   R13
                                  (a, b + c, 0)                                                                          (a, a + b + c, 0)
                                                         L14
                                                                                                                       L14
                     R23                                                               R13
                                                                 (a, b + c, a)                   (a, a + b + c, a)
                                                  R23

                     L14            (a, c, a)            R21                                              R21
                                                                                 R13
        (a, c, 0)                                                (a + b, c, a)                 (a + b, a + b + c, a)         R21

                                                                        R24                               R24
                            R21                                                        R13
                                                               (a + b, c, a + b)             (a + b, a + b + c, a + b)
                                                   L14
                                                                                                                L14
                                                                                   R13
                                  (a + b, c, 0)                                                                        (a + b, a + b + c, 0)



                                   Figure 31. Coordinates 1, 3 and 4 are listed.

                                      Type 3, ZB: l(∂F ) = ([R21 , R32 ] = R31 ).
(a − c, b + c, 0)                                                                                                                    (a − c, b, 0)
                                                                          R32
                                             R14
                                                                                                                                   R14
            R21                   (a + b, b + c, a − c)               (a − c, b + c, a − c)               (a − c, b, a − c)
                                                               R21                                R32
                                                R24                                                                    R31
                                                          R32
                       R14
(a + b, b + c, 0)                 (a + b, b + c, a + b)                 (a + b, b, a − c)                   (a, b, a − c)                R31
                                                                                                  R21
                                       R32                                          R34                                R34

      R32                           (a + b, b, a + b)                      (a + b, b, a)                        (a, b, a)
                                                                R24                               R21
                      R14
                                                                                                                             R14
     (a + b, b, 0)                                                                                                                       (a, b, 0)
                                                                          R21



                                   Figure 32. Coordinates 1,2 and 4 are listed.

   Type 4R: l(∂F) = [R21 , R31 ], I = {1, 4}. We will use the map φ in Figure 33. As in
type 3R, a − b, a − c and a − b − c are good by Lemma 3.9(b), and hence φ is a reduction
by Lemma 3.9(a).
   Type 5: l(∂F ) = [R12 , L13 ], I = {2, 3, 4}. As before, write v = (a, b, c, 0, ∗) (so that
vI = (b, c, 0)) and we can assume that both edges at v are incoming. Then the vertices
of FI are (b, c, 0), (b, c − a, 0), (b − a, c, 0) and (b − a, c − a, 0). We claim that the map in
Figure 34 is a reduction.
   Indeed, each new vertex is obtained from a vertex of F by replacing 0 by a or a − c
in the fourth coordinate. We know that a is good. If a − c is also good, this map is a
reduction by Lemma 3.9(a). And if a − c is bad, then c = a − (a − c) is good whence
(b, c, 0) < (b, c − a, 0), contrary to the assumption that vI = (b, c, 0).
  Type 6R: l(∂F) = [R12 , R35 ], I = {2, 4, 5}. In this case we can argue exactly as for type
1R.
        ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                            49

                                            Type 4, ZB: l(∂F ) = [R21 , R31 ]
     (a − b, 0)                                                                                                        (a − b − c, 0)
                                                                                    R31
                      R14                                                                                   R14

                          (a − b, a − b)                 (a − b − c, a − b)               (a − b − c, a − b − c)
                                                  R31                           R34
                            R24                                      R24                              R24

           R21              (a − b, a)                     (a − b − c, a)                   (a − b − c, a − c)                 R21
                                                  R31                           R34
                            R21                                      R21                              R21

                                (a, a)                       (a − c, a)                       (a − c, a − c)
                                                  R31                           R34
                      R14
                                                                                                            R14
       (a, 0)                                                                                                            (a − c, 0)
                                                                                    R31



                                   Figure 33. Coordinates 1 and 4 are listed

                                            Type 5, ZB: l(∂F ) = [R12 , L13 ]
    (b − a, c, 0)                                                                                                     (b − a, c − a, 0)
                                                               L13
                          L14                                                                             R34


                                  (b − a, c, a)          (b − a, c, a − c)          (b − a, c − a, a − c)
                                                   R34                        L13
           R12                           R12                         R12                        R12                      R12

                                    (b, c, a)               (b, c, a − c)             (b, c − a, a − c)
                                                   R34                        L13
                    L14                                                                                         R34


     (b, c, 0)                                                                                                          (b, c − a, 0)
                                                               L13



                                 Figure 34. Coordinates 2, 3 and 4 are listed

  Type 7R: l(∂F) = [R21 , R35 ], I = {1, 4, 5}. The argument in this case is similar to and
easier than type 3R.
   Types 8-12. The reduction diagrams in these cases have the same edge labelings as
the corresponding diagrams in the good coordinate case for IARn,1 (type GA), and the
justifications are also very similar. For completeness, we will present the diagrams for
types 8,9,10 and 11 in the appendix at the end of the paper.

4.3. Conclusion of the proof. As for the groups IARn,1 , it suffices to prove (the ana-
logue of) Proposition 3.11 for the groups IACn,1 .
Proof of Proposition 3.11 for the groups IACn,1 . Similarly to the groups IARn,1 , we con-
sider 3 cases: m(v) > 9, g(v) > 8 and z(v) > 8 (recall that m(v), g(v) and z(v) denote the
numbers of maximal, good and zero coordinates of v, respectively).
   If m(v) > 9, the proof is exactly the same as for the groups IARn,1 . The proof in the
case z(v) > 8 is analogous to the case g(v) > 8 for the groups IARn,1 . Finally, the proof
in the case g(v) > 8 is mostly similar to the case z(v) > 8 for the groups IARn,1 , but the
argument requires a substantial modification which is described below.
50                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV

   Thus assume that g(v) > 8. As in the case z(v) > 8 for the groups IARn,1 , after two
rounds of single-cell reductions, we can assume that all essential cells containing v have
type 2, 4, 7 or 12 (recall that a cell is essential if its support contains 1). Next we can use
double-cell reductions to first eliminate cells of type 12 and then cells of type 2, so all the
remaining essential cells have type 4 and 7. The difference comes at the next step. We
cannot apply the commuting map of the form C(Ri1 ) to cells of type 4, as this time the
first coordinates in a cell of type 4 may have opposite signs and thus the map C(Ri1 ) may
not be a reduction.
   Let us take a closer look at the reduction map in Figure 25, as we will need to apply it
not only to cells whose boundary label is exactly as in Figure 25, but also to other cells of
the same type. The direction and labels of the exterior horizontal edges (labeled by R21 )
are important. On the other hand, if we change the direction of the exterior vertical edges
or change their labels from R31 to L31 , we still get a valid van Kampen diagram which
yields a reduction map (with different vertex labels in the case of the direction change).
Further, one can obtain an analogous reduction map by replacing all labels R31 by either
Rij or Lij for fixed distinct i, j ̸∈ {1, 2, 3} (this will be a single-cell reduction for a cell of
type 7). Below we will refer to such maps as Figure 25-type reductions. Also, for brevity
we will say that an edge has a right (resp. left) label if its label is equal to Ri1 (resp. Li1 )
for some i.
   The following lemma shows how one can construct multiple-cell reductions starting from
Figure 25-type reductions.
Lemma 4.1. Let F and F ′ be cells which share an edge e containing v, where F has type
4, and let φ be a Figure 25-type F -reduction. Assume in addition that one of the following
holds:
     (i) F ′ has type 7.
    (ii) F has type 4 and the side cell of φ containing e has type 3 (so e plays the role of
         the bottom horizontal edge in Figure 25).
   (iii) F has type 4 and the side cell of φ containing e has type 4. Moreover, if e1 (resp.
         e′1 ) is the edge of F (resp. F ′ ) which contains v and is different from e, then either
         e1 and e′1 have the same direction at v and both have right labels or left labels, or
         e1 and e′1 have opposite directions at v and their labels are Ri1 and Lj1 for some
         i ̸= j.
Then there exists a Figure 25-type reduction φ′ at F ′ which is compatible with F at e, and
thus φ can be extended to a double-cell F ∪ F ′ -reduction.
Proof. We will sketch a proof of (iii). The proofs of other parts are similar but easier. If e1
and e′1 are both incoming at v and have right labels, the statement is clear from Figure 25,
and by obvious symmetry, the same is true if e1 and e′1 are both incoming at v and have
left labels.
   Suppose now that e1 and e′1 are both outgoing at v and both have right labels, say, R1i
and R1j (again the case of two left labels is analogous). If i = j, the cells F and F ′ are
mirror images of each other, so the assertion of Lemma 4.1 is trivially true (of course, in
this case we could simply cancel F and F ′ right away), so assume that i ̸= j. If we apply
the automorphism xi 7→ x−1             −1                    ′
                            i , xj 7→ xj , the edges e1 and e1 will change their orientation,
and their labels will change to L1i and L1j , reducing to the case from the first paragraph.
   Finally, the last case where e1 and e′1 have opposite directions, l(e1 ) = Ri1 and l(e′1 ) =
Lj1 with i ̸= j is treated similarly to the previous case. The hypothesis i ̸= j is necessary
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                    51

to ensure that we can apply an automorphism to change the direction (and the label) for
exactly one of the edges e1 and e′1 and not both of them.                            □

   We proceed with the proof of Proposition 3.11. Recall that by assumption, all the
remaining cells containing v have type 4 or 7 or are not essential. If deg (v) = 2, it is
routine to construct a double-cell reduction (which will eliminate v).
   Next suppose that deg (v) > 3. Below we will use a case-by-case argument to show that
there exists a triple-cell G-reduction for some gallery G at v such that the new cells at v
(which must be adjacent to each other) both have type 4, both have type 7, or have types
3 and 7. In the latter case, these 2 new cells can then be eliminated using a double-cell
reduction of the form C(Ri1 ) (this reduction may only produce new cells of types 4 and
7).
   Case 1: there is a length 3 gallery G at v not containing any cells of type 4. In this
                                              −1
case we use the commuting reduction CG (Ri1      ) for any good index i ̸∈ supp (G) (as before,
such i exists since g(v) > 8).
   Case 2: there is a length 3 gallery G at v whose middle cell has type 4 and whose
other two cells have other types. Denote the cells of G by F1 , F2 and F3 (where F2 is the
middle cell). Let φ2 be any Figure 25-type F2 -reduction. By Lemma 4.1(i), there exist
Figure 25-type reductions φi at Fi for i = 1, 3 which are compatible with φ2 . Then the
map φ1 ∪ φ2 ∪ φ3 is a G-reduction with required properties.
   Case 3: there is a length 3 gallery G at v which has exactly 2 cells of type 4 including the
middle one. Let F and and F ′ be the cells of type 4 in G. Thus, F and F ′ are adjacent,
and the remaining cell of G has type 7 (it cannot be non-essential as it shares an edge
with a cell of type 4). Let e be the unique common edge of F and F ′ . Start with any
Figure 25-type F-reduction such that the side cell at e has type 3. By Lemma 4.1(ii), we
can extend it to a double-cell reduction φ2 on F ∪ F ′ . And since the remaining cell of G
has type 7, by Lemma 4.1(i), we extend φ2 to a triple-cell G-reduction.
   Case 4: there is a length 3 gallery G at v all of whose cells have type 4. Let e1 , e2 , e3 , e4
be the edges of G containing v in counterclockwise order, and for i = 1, 2, 3 let Fi be the
cell of G containing ei and ei+1 .
   Assume first that e1 and e3 satisfy the hypothesis of Lemma 4.1(iii). We can start
with any Figure 25-type F -reduction such that the side cell at e2 has type 4, then
use Lemma 4.1(iii) to extend it to a double-cell F1 ∪ F2 -reduction φ2 and finally use
Lemma 4.1(ii) to extend φ2 to a triple-cell G-reduction.
   We now consider the general case. Without loss of generality assume that l(e3 ) = Ri1
for some i. We can always perform a double-cell F2 ∪ F3 -reduction such that the side cells
at e3 (the common edge of F2 and F3 ) have type 3 (this is possible by Lemma 4.1(ii)).
This will replace F2 ∪ F3 by another gallery of length 2 with cells of type 4, but the label
of e3 (or, more precisely, the new edge in the place of e3 ) will change from R1i to L1k ,
where k is any good index not in supp (G) (which is for us to choose), and the direction
of e3 will stay the same. After applying such double-cell reductions at most twice, we can
ensure that e1 and e3 satisfy the hypothesis of Lemma 4.1(iii), reducing to the case in the
previous paragraph.
   This completes the proof in the case deg (v) > 3, and it remains to consider the case
where deg (v) = 3. In this case G will denote the full gallery at v. If G has no cells of
type 4, we can use a commuting reduction of the form C(Ri1 ), so assume that G has at
52                                                    MIKHAIL ERSHOV


        Type 4, GB: Reduction at a full gallery of length 3, with all cells of type 4.
                                R51
              •                                           •                                                       •
                                              L41                                     R21
                                                              L41
                                          •                               •

                                              R31             R21             R31                                     R31

                                          •                               •            •          •
                              L45                   L41                         L42         R21             L42
                                                                    L41
                  R31     •                               v                                                       •
                    R51                                                               R31             L42
                                                              L41
                    •                                                     •            •          •
                                                                                L42         R21
                              R51                             R51
                                                                                                            R51

                   L45                                    •

                                    L41
              •                                                                                                   •
                                                                R21


          Figure 35. The six side cells containing v are shaded in gray. Four of those
          cells form two cancellable pairs – the two cells sharing an edge labeled R21
          and the two cells sharing an edge labeled R31 . After canceling those pairs,
          we obtain a diagram where v has degree 2 and the union of the two cells
          containing v is a subdiagram whose boundary label is [L−1    45 , R51 ] = L41 ,
          which is a defining relator of type 3. We can then replace those two cells
          by a single cell of type 3 and eliminate v.

least one cell of type 4. Below we will consider the case where all cells have type 4; the
other cases can be treated similarly but are slightly easier.
   Denote the cells of G by F1 , F2 , F3 and the edges of G containing v by e1 , e2 , e3 , so
that Fi contains ei and ei+1 , with indices taken mod 3. The edges ei must have distinct
supports since any two of them are adjacent edges of a cell of type 4. Applying suitable
automorphisms as in the proof of Lemma 4.1(iii), we can assume that all edges ei are
incoming at v, and then arguing as in Case 4 above, we can assume that all ei have right
labels. In this case we can construct a full G-reduction similarly to Case 3 above. Even
though we cannot make single-cell reductions compatible at all edges (we are forced to
have side cells of types 3 and 4 at one of the edges), we still obtain a full reduction after
cell cancellation – see Figure 35 below.                                                   □

                  5. Finite presentability of IARn,d and IACn,d for d > 1
     In this section we will prove Theorem 1.1 for arbirary d.
                                                                              ^n ) and
5.1. Outline. Throughout this section we fix integers 1 ≤ d ≤ n, let G = SAut(F
H = IAR   n,d or IACn,d . Recall some of the notations and conventions introduced in § 2:
      ^           ^
     • (X , R) denotes the optimized Gersten’s presentation for G (see § 2.3);
     • U md×n (Z) denotes the set of d × n matrices over Z whose columns span Zd ;
     • U md×n (Z) is isomorphic to G/H as a G-set where G acts on U md×n (Z) via (2.9)
       if H = IAR^  n,d and via (2.10) if H = IACn,d .
                                               ^
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                 53

     • As before, we will identify G/H with U md×n (Z) via the map from Lemma 2.26.
   Unless specifically stated otherwise, a diagram in this section will mean a U md×n (Z)-
labeled diagram over (X , R) with the respective action of G. However, U mk×n (Z)-labeled
diagrams for 1 ≤ k < d will naturally arise as well (see Observation 5.1 below).
   Given a diagram Ω and a non-empty subset I of {1, . . . , d}, we define rowI Ω to be the
projection of Ω onto the set of rows indexed by I, that is, rowI Ω has the same vertices,
edges and edge labels as Ω, and the label of each vertex in rowI Ω is obtained from the
label of the corresponding vertex of Ω by keeping only the rows indexed by elements of I.
We will use simplified notations in two special cases. Given 1 ≤ k ≤ d, we let
     • rowk Ω be the projection of Ω onto its k th row, that is, rowk Ω = row{k} Ω and
     • botk Ω be the projection of Ω onto its bottom k rows, that is,

                               botk Ω = row{d−k+1,d−k+2,...,d} Ω.

   The following basic observation will allow us to use many results previously established
in the case d = 1 without an explicit reference to the groups IARn,1 and IACn,1 :

Observation 5.1. Let Ω be a U md×n (Z)-labeled diagram with G-action given by (2.9)
(resp. (2.10)), and let I be any nonempty subset of {1, . . . , d}. Then rowI Ω is a U m|I|×n (Z)-
labeled diagram with G-action given by (2.9) (resp. (2.10)). In particular, for any 1 ≤
k ≤ d, the diagram rowk Ω is U m1×n (Z)-labeled.

   The reason we retain a G-action by projecting to rows and not columns is that in both
(2.9) and (2.10) G acts by right multiplication.
   Before proceeding, we introduce some additional terminology. The invariants below will
only be used for matrices in U md×n (Z) but can be defined for arbitrary d × n matrices
over Z. For each 0 ≤ k ≤ d we will identify Zk with the set of vectors in Zd whose last
d − k coordinates are equal to 0. The depth of a vector c ∈ Zd is the smallest k such that
c ∈ Zk .

Definition 5.2. Let 0 ≤ k ≤ d.
   (a) Elements of Zk will be called k-vectors. In other words, c ∈ Zd is a k-vector if and
       only if its depth is ≤ k (in particular, a 0-vector is just the zero vector).
   (b) If c ∈ Zd is a k-vector which was defined as a column of some v ∈ M atd×n (Z), we
       will say that c is a k-column of v.
   (c) We will say that v ∈ M atd×n (Z) is k-unimodular if its k-columns span Zk .
   (d) The k-defect of v ∈ M atd×n (Z) denoted by defk (v) is the number of non-k-columns
       of v.
Now let Ω be a U md×n (Z)-labeled diagram.
   (d) We will say that Ω is k-unimodular if all of its vertices are k-unimodular (thus, Ω
       is always d-unimodular).
   (e) We define defk (Ω), the k-defect of Ω, to be the maximum of the k-defects of its
       vertices.

One-dimensional vs higher-dimensional settings. Many definitions and construc-
tions introduced in the special case d = 1 admit obvious generalizations for arbitrary d.
54                                            MIKHAIL ERSHOV

In some other situations, we will use what we did in the case d = 1 as a tool to estab-
lish the corresponding result for d > 1. We will refer to the cases d = 1 and d > 1 as
one-dimensional setting and higher-dimensional setting, respectively. 2
Constant C. Throughout this section C will denote a constant with the property that
for any gallery ∆ of length ≤ 3 we have |supp (∆)| ≤ C. By Observation 3.3(ii), the
smallest integer with this property is C = 8, so the reader may simply replace C by 8
in all formulas below; however, we feel that some of the computations may be easier to
follow if one thinks of C as an unspecified constant.
Lifting diagram maps. In § 3,4 we constructed a number of specific diagram maps in the
one-dimensional setting. If φ is one of those maps, we can consider the corresponding map
φ∗ of U md×n (Z)-labeled diagrams. By definition, the underlying unlabeled3 van Kampen
diagram for φ∗ is the same as for φ and the labels of all new vertices are obtained from
the labels of old vertices by the same formulas. In this case we will say that φ∗ is a lift
of φ. The majority of diagram maps considered in this section will be constructed in this
way.
Extended labels. A new key feature in the higher-dimensional setting is that the order
on the vertices will not be entirely determined by their labels and instead we will use
the extended labels. Let Z = U md×n (Z). Later in this section we will introduce two
super-Artinian orders on Z, called Step 1 pre-order and Step 2 pre-order (these orders
will be used in different parts on this proofs). Relative to each of these orders, we will
consider the poset Z ′ = Z × Z≥0 ordered lexicographically, that is, (z1 , h1 ) < (z2 , h2 ) if
and only if z1 < z2 or z1 and z2 are incomparable and h1 < h2 . It is clear that Z ′ is also
super-Artinian.
   To each vertex v of a diagram ∆ we will associate its extended label L∆ (v) such that
                                          L∆ (v) = (l(v), h∆ (v))
for some h∆ (v) ∈ Z, that is, the Z-component of the extended label of v is its usual label.
   The group G will only act on Z, not on Z ′ , but this will not introduce any complications
for the proof.
   A vertex v ∈ V (∆) will be called maximal for ∆ if L∆ (v) is a maximal element of the
set {L∆ (w) : w ∈ V (∆)}.
   Let ψ : ∆ → ∆′ be a diagram map. Recall that in the one-dimensional setting, a
vertex v ∈ V (∆′ ) was called new (for ψ) if v ∈ V (∆′ ) \ V (∆) and old otherwise. With
the use of extended labels, things become more complicated as a vertex may remain in
the diagram, but acquire a new extended label, and our original definition of reduction
becomes ambiguous in the presence of such vertices.
   To address this issue, in the higher-dimensional setting we will use the following termi-
nology:
Definition 5.3. Let ψ : ∆ → ∆′ be a diagram map. A vertex v ∈ V (∆′ ) will be called
    (i) new if v ∈ V (∆′ ) \ V (∆);
   (ii) old if v ∈ V (∆′ ) ∩ V (∆) and h∆′ (v) = h∆ (v);
  (iii) pseudo-new if v ∈ V (∆′ ) ∩ V (∆) but h∆′ (v) ̸= h∆ (v).
     2We will avoid explicit references to the value of d in such situations to avoid confusion since we treat
d as a fixed integer throughout this section.
   3Recall that this means that the vertices are not labeled, but the edges are still labeled.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )               55

   Thus, by our convention a pseudo-new vertex belongs to both the old diagram ∆ and
the new diagram ∆′ , but represents different elements of Z ′ depending on which diagram
we are considering. This is why we explicitly refer to the diagram in the notation for the
extended label.
   We can now give a formal definition of a reduction applicable in the higher-dimensional
setting.

Definition 5.4. Let ψ : ∆ → ∆′ be a diagram map and v ∈ V (∆) a maximal vertex of
∆. We will say that ψ is a reduction if L∆′ (w) < L∆ (v) for any new or pseudo-new vertex
w.

  As in the one-dimensional setting, it is straightforward to check that this definition does
not depend on the choice of a maximal vertex v.
  While this definition technically does not fit the setting of Section 2, the assertion of
Lemma 2.14 remains valid (with the same proof).
Outline of the proof of Theorem 1.1 for d > 1. As in the one-dimensional setting,
given a vertex v of some diagram, by ∥v∥ we will denote the ℓ∞ -norm of its label. Given
a diagram ∆, we let ∥∆∥ = max{∥v∥ : v ∈ V (∆)}.
   We need one more technical definition:

Definition 5.5. A matrix v ∈ U md×n (Z) will be called small if
     (i) ∥v∥ = 1;
    (ii) v differs from the d × n “identity” matrix (Id×d | 0d×(n−d) ) in at most 8 columns.
         In particular, every row of v has at most 9 nonzero entries and hence by (i) has
         ℓ1 -norm ≤ 9;
   (iii) v is k-unimodular for all k ≤ d.
A subset of U md×n (Z) is small if all of its elements are small.

  The following result will be established at the end of this section.

Proposition 5.6. There exists a small subset E of G/H whose preimage in Cay(G, X )
is connected (here we identify G/H with U md×n (Z) as before).

   Unlike the case d = 1, we will formally prove finite presentability of H for d > 1 using
our general finite presentability criterion, Proposition 2.3, bypassing Lemma 2.15. The
latter is actually not applicable since the partial orders we will be using for d > 1 are only
assumed super-Artinian, but not necessarily strongly Artinian.
   More precisely, we will use Corollary 5.7 below which is an easy consequence of Propo-
sitions 5.6 and 2.3.

Corollary 5.7. Suppose that there exists a constant M such that for any U md×n (Z)-
labeled diagram Ω over (X , R) with small boundary there exists a diagram map Ω → Ω′
such that ∥Ω′ ∥ ≤ M . Then H is finitely presented.

Proof. Let E be the small set from Proposition 5.6. Corollary 5.7 implies that the hy-
potheses of Proposition 2.3 hold if A = E and B is the set of matrices in U md×n (Z) with
ℓ∞ -norm at most M (clearly, this is a finite set). Hence by Proposition 2.3, H is finitely
presented.                                                                               □
56                                         MIKHAIL ERSHOV

How to verify the hypothesis of Corollary 5.7. Let Ω be any diagram with small
boundary. Our goal is to show that the hypothesis of Corollary 5.7 is always satisfied,
that is, to construct a diagram map Ω → Ω′ with Ω′ of bounded norm. This will be
accomplished in several stages where at each stage we will concentrate on a particular row
of the diagram. We start by projecting the entire diagram Ω onto its last row rowd Ω. The
hypothesis that Ω has small boundary implies, in particular, that for any v ∈ V (∂Ω) we
have ∥v∥ = 1 and ∥rowd (v)∥1 ≤ 9. Since C ≥ 8, applying Proposition 3.11 sufficiently
many times, we obtain a reduction map φ : rowd Ω → ∆d such that ∥v∥ = 1 and ∥v∥1 ≤
C + 1 for every vertex v of ∆d . We can now lift φ to construct a diagram map φ∗ : Ω → ∆
such that for each vertex v of ∆ we have ∥rowd (v)∥ = 1 and ∥rowd (v)∥1 ≤ C + 1, and so
defd−1 (∆) ≤ C +1. The new diagram ∆ is still U md×n (Z)-labeled and thus d-unimodular.
   Next we would like to apply a similar procedure to the (d−1)st row of ∆, but we have to
be careful as we do not want to lose the nice structure of the dth row. In order to accomplish
this, we first perform additional reductions involving the dth row to make our diagram
(d − 1)-unimodular. This can be done preserving the condition ∥rowd (v)∥ = 1 for all v
and keeping the (d − 1)-defect uniformly bounded (although with a slightly worse bound
than C + 1). Once we obtain a (d − 1)-unimodular diagram satisfying these additional
conditions, we can lift one-dimensional reductions (with some minor modifications) to
make both ∥rowd ∥ and ∥rowd−1 ∥ equal to 1 and making the (d − 2)-defect bounded. We
then successively apply the same procedure to each row (going from bottom to top), so in
the end we make the ℓ∞ -norm of the entire diagram equal to 1.
   The algorithm we have outlined so far will only work when d ≤ Cn since it can only
ensure that the k-defect is bounded above by C(d − k) (and we need the k-defect to be
bounded away from n to deal with the k th row). In order to overcome this problem, we will
make additional adjustments after dealing with the k th row (as described in the previous
paragraph) which will yield a better bound on k-defect: defk ≤ d − k + C. Unfortunately,
this will be done at the expense of substantially increasing the norms of the last d − k
rows, which is why in the end we will only be able to claim that the ℓ∞ -norm is absolutely
bounded (rather than bounded by 1). This concludes a (very) informal sketch of the
algorithm which will be described in this section.
   We now formulate the main result of this section:

Theorem 5.8. Assume that 1 ≤ d ≤ n − (C 2 + 6C + 3). Then there exists a sequence of
positive integers M1 , . . . , Md with the following property. Suppose that for some 1 ≤ k ≤ d
we are given a diagram Ω such that
     (a) Ω is k-unimodular;
     (b) defk (Ω) ≤ d − k + C;
     (c) if k < d, then ∥botd−k Ω∥ ≤ Mk+1 ;
     (d) Ω has small boundary.
Then there exists a diagram map Ω → Ω1 such that
       (i) Ω1 is (k − 1)-unimodular;
      (ii) defk−1 (Ω1 ) ≤ d − k + C + 1;
     (iii) ∥botd−k+1 Ω1 ∥ ≤ Mk .

     First we will deduce Theorem 1.1 from Theorem 5.8.
      ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )              57

Proof of Theorem 1.1. Observe that (C 2 + 6C + 3) = 115 for C = 8, so any d ≤ n − 115
satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 5.8. We will prove finite presentability of H using
Corollary 5.7.
   First note that any U md×n (Z)-labeled diagram Ω satisfies condition (a)-(c) from The-
orem 5.8 for k = d. Indeed, Ω is d-unimodular by assumption, defd (v) = 0 for all v ∈ Zd
(and hence defd (Ω) = 0), and (c) is vacuous for k = d.
   Assume now that Ω has small boundary, so (d) holds as well and thus we can apply
Theorem 5.8 with k = d to Ω. The obtained diagram Ω1 satisfies conditions (i)-(iii) for
k = d, which are the same as (a)-(c) for k = d − 1. Since diagram maps do not change
the boundary, Ω1 also satisfies (d) (which is the same for all k). Thus, we can apply
Theorem 5.8 to Ω1 with k = d − 1 and keep going up to (and including) k = 1. If
Ωf in is the diagram obtained at the end, by condition (iii) for k = 1 we have ∥Ωf in ∥ =
∥botd (Ωf in )∥ ≤ M1 , so H is finitely presented by Corollary 5.7.                     □

  Before discussing the structure of the proof of Theorem 5.8 in detail, we introduce some
auxiliary terminology.

Definition 5.9. Let 0 ≤ k ≤ d.
    (i) Define a relation ∼k on Zd by v ∼k w if either w − v or w + v is a k-vector, that
        is, w agrees with either v or −v in the last d − k rows. It is clear that ∼k is an
        equivalence relation.
   (ii) Given v ∈ M atd×n (Z), its weak k-defect denoted by wdefk (v) is the maximum
        number of non-k-columns of v which are pairwise inequivalent with respect to ∼k .
  (iii) If Ω is a diagram, we define wdefk (Ω) as the maximum value of wdefk (v) where v
        is a vertex of Ω.

   Clearly, wdefk (v) ≤ defk (v). Of course, the difference between defk (v) and wdefk (v)
can be arbitrarily large; however, by Proposition 5.13 below any diagram admits a simple
modification such that the difference defk (v) − wdefk (v) is bounded by an absolute con-
stant for every vertex v of the modified diagram. Thus, the k-defect is to a large extent
controlled by the weak k-defect. The advantage of working with the latter is that, as we
will see below, it is much easier to construct reductions which do not increase the weak
k-defect.

Definition 5.10. A diagram map ∆ → ∆′ will be called k-safe if
   (A) ∥rowi ∆′ ∥ ≤ ∥rowi ∆∥ for all i > k, so in particular ∥botd−k ∆′ ∥ ≤ ∥botd−k ∆∥;
   (B) wdefk (∆′ ) ≤ wdefk (∆);
   (C) if ∆ is k-unimodular, then so is ∆′ .

  Very informally, a diagram map is k-safe if it does not make the structure of the last
d − k rows of the diagram more complicated.
  For the rest of this section we fix 1 ≤ k ≤ d and view it as k from the statement of
Theorem 5.8. The proof of Theorem 5.8 will be divided into 3 steps:
     • In Step 1 we will make the ℓ∞ -norm of the k th row equal to 1.
     • In Step 2 we will make the diagram (k − 1)-unimodular.
     • Finally in Step 3 we will obtain the desired bound on the (k − 1)-defect while
       keeping the norms of the last d − k + 1 rows bounded.
58                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

5.2. Step 1. We start by formulating the main result of the first step of the proof of
Theorem 5.8. Recall that the notion of super-Artinian partial order was defined in § 2.2.
Theorem 5.11 (Step 1). Let Ω and d be as in Theorem 5.8. There exists a super-Artinian
partial order (defined below and called the Step 1 order) and a k-safe reduction φ : Ω → Ω′
(with respect to that order) such that
    (i) defk (Ω′ ) ≤ defk (Ω) + C and therefore defk (Ω′ ) ≤ d − k + 2C
        (recall that defk (Ω) ≤ d − k + C by the hypotheses of Theorem 5.8);
   (ii) the k th row of any vertex of Ω′ has ℓ∞ -norm 1.
     The assertion of Theorem 5.11 is an easy consequence of the following two propositions.
Proposition 5.12. Let ∆ be a k-unimodular diagram with small boundary such that
   (a) defk (∆) ≤ n − 4C − k − 1;
   (b) ∥rowk (∆)∥ ≥ 2.
Then for any maximal vertex v of ∆ there exists a k-safe reduction ∆ → ∆′ which elimi-
nates v.
Remark. As we will explain later, the hypotheses of Proposition 5.12 imply that v must
be an interior vertex (see Observation 5.22 below).
Proposition 5.13. Any diagram ∆ with small boundary admits a k-safe reduction ∆ →
∆′ such that defk (∆′ ) ≤ wdefk (∆′ ) + C.
     Let us first explain how Theorem 5.11 follows from Propositions 5.12 and 5.13.
Proof of Theorem 5.11. We start with the initial diagram Ω and keep applying one of these
propositions as long as we can. More precisely, if at some point we have a diagram ∆ with
defk (∆) > wdefk (∆) + C, apply Propositions 5.13; otherwise apply Proposition 5.12 as
long as its hypotheses are satisfied. Since reductions in Proposition 5.12 are full reduc-
tions and the order is Artinian, the process will terminate after finitely many steps by
Lemma 2.14. Let Ω′ be the resulting diagram, and let φ : Ω → Ω′ be the composition
of all reductions from Propositions 5.12 and 5.13. We claim that φ and Ω′ satisfy all the
required conditions.
   Since the reductions in Propositions 5.12 and 5.13 are k-safe, so is φ. In particular,
wdefk (Ω′ ) ≤ wdefk (Ω). Since Proposition 5.13 is not applicable to Ω′ (in a non-trivial
way), we have defk (Ω′ ) ≤ wdefk (Ω′ )+C and thus defk (Ω′ ) ≤ wdefk (Ω)+C ≤ defk (Ω)+C,
so condition (i) in Theorem 5.11 holds.
   Now recall that d ≤ n − (C 2 + 6C + 3) < n − 6C − 3 and hence defk (Ω′ ) ≤ (n − 6C −
3) − k + 2C = n − k − 4C − 3, so Ω′ satisfies condition (a) of Proposition 5.12. Since
Proposition 5.12 is not applicable, condition (b) does not hold, that is, ∥rowk Ω′ ∥ = 1.
Thus Ω′ satisfies both (i) and (ii) from the conclusion of Theorem 5.11.                □
  Before turning to the proofs of Propositions 5.12 and 5.13, we need to define the order
that will be used in Step 1. First we introduce some additional terminology.
Definition 5.14. Fix k with 1 ≤ k ≤ d. Let v ∈ M atd×n (Z) and c a column of v. We
will say that
     (i) c is maximal if |ck | ≥ |dk | for any column d of v;
    (ii) c is good if c is a k-column, c is not maximal and ck ̸= 0.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                     59

   Note that c is maximal if and only if ck is a maximal coordinate of rowk (v). If c is
good, then ck must be a good coordinate of rowk (v), but the converse is not true (since
rowk (c) cannot tell us whether c is a k-column or not).
   As in the one-dimensional setting, we will also need the corresponding notions relative
to a U md×n (Z)-labeled diagram Ω. Given such a diagram Ω, let M = ∥rowk (Ω)∥. A
vector c ∈ Zd with |ck | ≤ M will be called Ω-maximal (resp. Ω-good) if |ck | = M (resp. c
is a k-vector and 0 < |ck | < M ).
   As we will see shortly, there is a clear distinction between the roles played by k-columns
and non-k-columns in the definition of the Step 1 order and the construction of reductions
in the proof of Proposition 5.12. To make this distinction more transparent, we will say
that
      • A vector c ∈ Zd is unrestricted if c is a k-vector and restricted otherwise.
We will explain why we call k-vectors unrestricted in the remark below.

Observation 5.15. Let v, v ′ ∈ M atd×n (Z), and suppose that v ′ is obtained from v by
replacing coli (v) by coli (v) ± colj (v) for some i ̸= j. If colj (v) is a k-column, then
   (a) v and v ′ agree in the last d − k rows;
   (b) wdefk (v ′ ) = wdefk (v);
   (c) the k-columns of v and v ′ span the same subspace of Zd .

Proof. (a) holds by definition. It also implies that each column of v ′ is equivalent to the
corresponding column of v with respect to ∼k which yields (b) (recall that ∼k was defined
in Definition 5.9). Finally, since colj (v) is a k-column, coli (v) and coli′ (v) = coli (v)±colj (v)
are both k-columns or both non-k-columns; in either case (c) holds.                                □

Remark. Recall that the reduction in the statement of Theorem 5.11 is required to be
k-safe. Suppose now that ψ is a diagram map such that every new vertex v ′ is obtained
from some vertex v by replacing coli (v) by coli (v) ± colj (v) for some i ̸= j. If colj (v)
is a k-column in all cases, Observation 5.15 immediately implies that ψ is k-safe (see
Lemma 5.21 below). Thus, when constructing a k-safe map, we can add (resp. subtract)
a k-column to (resp. from) any other column without any restrictions.

Step 1 order. Let us now define the Step 1 order. As in the one-dimensional setting,
it will be defined as a comparison algorithm, where we stop as soon as two vertices are
comparable via a given criterion. We warn the reader that this order will only be used in
step 1. Different orders will be used in steps 2 and 3.
   As we already mentioned, a key difference with the one-dimensional setting is that to
compare two vertices, it will in general be insufficient to know their labels. But first we
define the Step 1 pre-order which only takes labels into account.
Step 1 pre-order:
    (1) The vertex with smaller ℓ∞ -norm of the k th row is smaller.
    (2) The vertex with fewer maximal columns is smaller.
    (3) The vertex with fewer non-maximal restricted columns is smaller. Equivalently,
        the vertex with more non-maximal unrestricted columns is smaller.
    (4) The vertex with more good columns is smaller.
    (5) The vertex with more (k − 1)-columns is smaller.
60                                        MIKHAIL ERSHOV

     (6) Let v ur be the matrix obtained from the label of v by removing all the restricted
         columns. The vertex v with the smaller value of the vector
                     (∥rowk (v ur )∥1 , ∥rowk−1 (v ur )∥1 , . . . , ∥row1 (v ur )∥1 )
       (with respect to the lexicographical order, moving from left to right) is smaller.
Given two vertices v and w, we will write v < w if v is smaller than w relative to Step 1
pre-order and v ∼ w if v and w are incomparable.
  Before proceeding, we need a technical definition.
Definition 5.16. Let ∆ be a diagram.
   (a) A vertex v of ∆ will be called pre-maximal if its label l(v) is maximal relative to
       the Step 1 pre-order.
  (b) A cell F of ∆ will be called purely maximal if all of its vertices are pre-maximal.
   (c) Given a vertex v of ∆, we define h∆ (v) to be the number of purely maximal cells
       of ∆ which contain v and have type 5.
   As we will see below, given a cell F containing a pre-maximal vertex v, one can construct
a single-cell F-reduction with respect to the Step 1 pre-order in almost all cases, except
when F is purely maximal and has type 5. What we can do in the latter case is construct
a diagram map φ such that for every new vertex w of φ either w < v (relative to the Step 1
pre-order) or w ∼ v, but h∆ (w) < h∆ (v). In order to turn this map into a reduction, we
introduce extended labels as follows.
   The extended labeling set is Z ′ = Z × Z≥0 , where Z = U md×n (Z) as before. Given a
vertex v ∈ V (∆), its extended label is L∆ (v) = (l(v), h∆ (v)) where l(v) is the usual label.
Recall that Z ′ is ordered lexicographically, that is,
      L∆ (v) < L∆′ (v ′ ) if and only if l(v) < l(v ′ ) or l(v) ∼ l(v ′ ) and h∆ (v) < h∆′ (v ′ ).
Notation: Given vertices v and w, we will still write v < w only when l(v) < l(w).
Whenever an inequality between vertices takes extended labels into account, those ex-
tended labels will be mentioned explicitly.
   Recall from Definition 5.3 that given a diagram map ψ : ∆ → ∆′ , a vertex v is called
pseudo-new for ψ if v ∈ V (∆′ ) ∩ V (∆) but L∆′ (v) ̸= L∆ (v). Thus, a pseudo-new vertex
will be considered to belong to both the old and the new diagrams, but with different
extended labels.
   While it is difficult to control which vertices become pseudo-new, there is a sufficient
condition for a diagram map to be a reduction which only depends on the extended labels
of new vertices.
Lemma 5.17. Let ψ : ∆ → ∆′ be a diagram map and v a maximal vertex of ∆ (with
respect to Step 1 order). Suppose that
     (i) L∆′ (w) < L∆ (v) for every new vertex w of ψ;
    (ii) every new cell of ψ of type 5 has at least one vertex u (not necessarily new) with
         u < v.
Then ψ is a reduction (with respect to Step 1 order) .
   If w < v for every new vertex of ψ, conditions (i) and (ii) hold automatically (for (ii)
this is true since every new cell must contain at least one new vertex). Thus, we have the
following special case of Lemma 5.17 which will be applicable to most cell types:
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                   61

Lemma 5.18. Let ψ : ∆ → ∆′ be a diagram map and v a maximal vertex of ∆. If w < v
for every new vertex of ψ, then ψ is a reduction.
Proof of Lemma 5.17. Because of condition (i), we just need to show that L∆′ (w) < L∆ (v)
whenever w is a pseudo-new vertex.
   Let w be a pseudo-new vertex, so that h∆ (w) ̸= h∆′ (w). If h∆′ (w) < h∆ (w), then
L∆′ (w) = (l(w), h∆′ (w)) < L∆ (w) = (l(w), h∆ (w)) and hence L∆′ (w) < L∆ (v) (as v is
maximal for ∆).
   Assume now that h∆′ (w) > h∆ (w). This means that ∆′ has a new cell F which is
purely maximal, has type 5 and contains w. By condition (ii), F contains a vertex u with
l(u) < l(v). Since F is purely maximal and contains w, we must have l(w) ∼ l(u). Hence
l(w) < l(v) as well, and therefore L∆′ (w) < L∆ (v) as desired.                        □

Proof of Proposition 5.13. If defk (∆) ≤ wdefk (∆) + C, there is nothing to do, so suppose
that the opposite inequality holds. Thus there exists a vertex v such that defk (v) >
wdefk (v) + C; let us call any such v irregular. Condition (ii) in the definition of a small
matrix (Definition 5.5) implies that small vertices cannot be irregular. Since we assume
that ∆ has small boundary, irregular vertices must be interior. Among all irregular vertices
choose one with the largest k-defect and denote it by v.
   Let G be any gallery at v of length min(3, deg (v)), that is, a length 3 gallery at v or
the full gallery at v if deg (v) = 2. Recall that |supp (G)| ≤ C (by the definition of C).
Since v is irregular, there exist distinct indices i, j ̸∈ supp (G) such that coli (v) ∼k colj (v)
                                                                                         ±1
and coli (v) (and hence also colj (v)) is restricted. Then the commuting map CG (Rij        ) is a
                                                                         ∞
reduction (for a suitable choice of sign) as it does not increase the ℓ -norm or the number
of maximal columns and increases the number of non-maximal unrestricted columns. It is
                                                                       ±1
also straightforward to check that this map is k-safe. Since CG (Rij      ) decreases the degree
of v, applying this operation to various G, we will eliminate v after finitely many iterations.
                                                                      ±1
   Also note that the new vertices arising from the maps CG (Rij         ) have k-defect smaller
than defk (v). Since v was an irregular vertex with largest k-defect, after applying the
procedure in the previous paragraph to finitely many vertices, we will obtain a diagram
∆′ which has no irregular vertices, that is, defk (∆′ ) ≤ wdefk (∆′ ) + C.                      □
   Before turning to the proof of Proposition 5.12, we state the higher-dimensional ana-
logues of Lemma 3.8 and 3.9 which provide a sufficient condition for a diagram map to be
a reduction. The proofs are completely analogous to the one-dimensional setting.
Lemma 5.19 (analogue of Lemma 3.8). Let ∆ be a diagram and M = ∥rowk (∆)∥. The
following hold:
    (a) Let w be a vertex of ∆, let I be a subset of {1, . . . , n}, and assume that |wkt | = M
        for some t ∈ I (here wkt is the (k, t)-entry of w). Let w    e ∈ Zn be such that
          (i) wekj = wkj for all j ̸∈ I;
         (ii) |weki | < M for all i ∈ I.
             ′
        If w ∈ M atd×n (Z) is obtained from w  e by a signed permutation of columns, then
        w′ < w.
    (b) Let ψ : ∆ → ∆′ be a diagram map and assume that every new vertex w′ of ψ can
        be constructed from some old vertex w as in (a). Then ψ is a reduction.
Lemma 5.20 (analogue of Lemma 3.9). Let ψ : ∆ → ∆1 be a diagram map and let v be
a maximal vertex of ∆. The following hold:
62                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV

     (a) Let w, w′ ∈ M atd×n (Z), and suppose that w′ is obtained from w by replacing one
         or several ∆-bad columns by ∆-good columns. If w is a vertex of ∆, then w′ < v.
         Hence if every new vertex w′ of ψ is obtained from some old vertex w in this way,
         then ψ is a reduction.
     (b) Suppose that coli (v) is good for some i. Let u be another vertex of ∆, which agrees
         with v apart from the ith column. Then the ith column of u is ∆-good.
  We will also need the following sufficient condition for a diagram to be k-safe. Recall
that we call c ∈ Zd unrestricted (resp. restricted) if c is a k-vector (resp. non-k-vector).
Lemma 5.21. Let ψ be a diagram map. Suppose that every new vertex w of ψ is obtained
from an old vertex by the composition of some of the following operations:
   (a) a signed permutation of columns;
   (b) adding (resp. subtracting) an unrestricted column to (resp. from) another column,
        e.g. (a, b, c, x, . . .) 7→ (a + x, b, c, x, . . .) where x is unrestricted;
    (c) replacing a 0-column by another (possibly restricted) column;
   (d) replacing a restricted column or a 0-column by an unrestricted vector;
    (e) if the vertex has 2 identical columns, replacing one of them by 0, e.g. (a, b, a, . . .) 7→
        (a, b, 0, . . .).
Then ψ is k-safe.
Proof. Operations (a)-(e) do not increase the ℓ∞ -norm for any of the last d − k rows,
do not increase the weak k-defect and preserve k-unimodularity. This holds for (b) by
Observation 5.15 and is obvious for the remaining operations. Thus, any map obtained as
composition of these operations is k-safe.                                           □
     We now begin the proof of Proposition 5.12.
Proof of Proposition 5.12. Recall that defk (v) ≤ n−4C −k −1, so v has at least 4C +k +1
unrestricted columns. Hence (at least) one of the following holds:
    (1) v has at least C + k columns of depth between 1 and k − 1;
    (2) v has at least C + 2 maximal unrestricted columns;
    (3) v has at least C + 1 good columns;
    (4) v has at least C + 1 0-columns.
   We will consider these 4 cases separately. Cases 1 and 2 are easier, and here we will
explicitly describe how to construct a sequence of reductions which eliminates v. Cases
3 and 4 correspond to the good coordinate case and the zero coordinate case in the
one-dimensional setting, respectively. In these cases the desired reduction map will be
constructed as a composition of single-cell, double-cell and triple-cell reductions. Double-
cell and triple-cell reductions will be obtained as combinations of compatible single-cell
reductions mostly as in the one-dimensional setting, but we will need a minor modification
involving cells of type 4GB.
   For the rest of the proof we fix a maximal vertex v.
Observation 5.22. The vertex v is interior and has at least one good column.
Proof. Let M = ∥rowk (v)∥. Since v is maximal, by the definition of Step 1 order
∥rowk (v)∥ = ∥rowk (∆)∥, so M ≥ 2 by hypothesis (b) in Proposition 5.12. Since we also as-
sume that ∆ has small boundary, for any boundary vertex w of ∆ we have ∥rowk (w)∥ = 1,
so v must be interior.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                 63

   Since v is k-unimodular, it must have a column c of depth k whose k th coordinate, call
it ck , is not divisible by M . Thus, 0 < |ck | < M , so by definition c is good.       □
   Observation 5.22 will be crucial for the argument in Case 4 below.
   Case 1: v has at least C + k columns of depth between 1 and k − 1.
   Take any gallery G at v of length min(3, deg (v)). By the hypotheses in this case there
exist distinct i, j ̸∈ supp (G) such that coli (v) and colj (v) have the same depth m with
1 ≤ m ≤ k − 1, so that both entries vm,i and vm,j are nonzero.
                                          ±1              ±1
   Consider the commuting maps CG (Rij       ) and CG (Rji   ). At least one of these 4 maps,
call it ψ, has the following property: for every new vertex w′ there is a vertex w of G
such that w and w′ are incomparable based on the criteria (1)-(5) in the Step 1 pre-order,
∥rowtur (w′ )∥ = ∥rowtur (w)∥ for all m < t ≤ k and ∥rowm       ur (w ′ )∥ < ∥row ur (w)∥ in the
                                                                                 m
notations from criterion (6). Then w′ < w and thus ψ is a reduction. It is also k-safe since
every new vertex is obtained from an old vertex using operation (b) from Lemma 5.21.
                                      ±1              ±1
   Since the commuting maps CG (Rij      ) and CG (Rji   ) decrease the degree of v, after re-
peating this operation finitely many times we will eliminate v.
   In Cases 2, 3 and 4 we will construct a reduction φ∗ by lifting a suitable one-dimensional
reduction φ.
   Case 2: v has at least C + 2 maximal unrestricted columns.
   We construct the one-dimensional reduction φ as in the maximal coordinate case (see
§ 3,4). One can prove that φ∗ is a reduction exactly as we proved that φ is a reduction in
§ 3,4. As in Case 1, every new vertex is obtained from an old vertex using operation (b)
from Lemma 5.21, so φ∗ is also k-safe.
   Case 3: v has at least C + 1 good columns. The majority of work in this case will
be devoted to constructing single-cell reductions. Once this is done, we will describe a
minor change in the definition of multiple-cell reductions (compared to the one-dimensional
setting).
   So let us fix a cell F containing v. As in the one-dimensional setting, we will specify
a small set I (depending on the type of F) such that the replacement diagram of our
reduction map is supported on I. We can permute the columns so that the first column is
maximal, the fourth column is good and 4 ̸∈ supp(F) (the last condition can be arranged
since |supp(F )| ≤ C). In addition, we can also assume that the first and fourth columns
of v have positive k th coordinate.
   Also recall that FI and vI denote the I-traces of F and v, respectively.
   First let us assume that F has type other than 4GB, 5GA or 5GB. Similarly to Case 2,
we construct the one-dimensional reduction φ as in the good coordinate case (see § 3,4). By
straightforward case-by-case verification, every new vertex w′ of φ∗ satisfies the following
2 conditions:
    (1) w′ is obtained from some old vertex w either as in Lemma 5.19(a) or by re-
         placing a 0-column by a ∆-good column (a special case of the condition from
         Lemma 5.20(a));
    (2) w′ is obtained from some old vertex w1 (possibly different from w in (1)) by
         adding/subtracting an unrestricted column to/from another column (operation
         (b) from Lemma 5.21).
Condition (1), Lemma 5.19(b) and Lemma 5.20(a) imply that φ∗ is a reduction while (2)
and Lemma 5.21 imply that φ∗ is k-safe.
64                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

   Type 4GB. Next consider the case where F has type 4GB. As in the one-dimensional
setting, we set I = {1, 2} and assume that vI = (a, b) and the other three vertices of F
have I-traces (a − b, b), (a − c, b) and (a − b − c, b).
   If bk ̸= 0, we define φ as in Figure 25. The map φ∗ is k-safe by Lemma 5.21(b),
and one can prove that φ∗ is a reduction exactly as in the one-dimensional setting. On
the other hand, if bk = 0, the first columns of all vertices of F have non-negative k th
coordinate and hence the commuting map C(R41 ) is a reduction. This map is also k-safe
by Lemma 5.21(b).
   Type 5GA. As in the one-dimensional setting, we set I = {1, 2} and assume that vI =
(a, b) and the other three vertices of F have I-traces (a + b, b), (a + c, b) and (a + b + c, b).
Define φ as in Figure 10. The map φ∗ is k-safe by Lemma 5.21(b), so we only need to
prove that φ∗ is a reduction.
   If either bk ̸= 0 or b is unrestricted, we can argue as in the one-dimensional setting to
show that w < v for every new vertex w of φ∗ and hence φ∗ is a reduction by Lemma 5.18.
If ck ̸= 0 or c is unrestricted, we can construct a reduction by swapping the roles of the
2nd and 3rd columns.
   Thus, it remains to consider the case where bk = ck = 0 and b and c are both restricted.
In this case the cell F is purely maximal, so h∆ (v) > 0. We will use Lemma 5.17. Set
∆new = φ∗ (∆). Let us first verify condition (i). If w is a new vertex of φ∗ , then w < v
except when wI = (a+b, b+d) or wI = (a+b+c, b+d), in which case l(w) ∼ l(v). Suppose
that w is one of the latter two vertices. The diagram ∆new has exactly one cell F5 of type
5 containing w, and its vertices have I-traces (a+b, b+d), (a+b+c, b+d), (a−d, b+d) and
(a + c − d, b + d). If z is any of the last two vertices, then z < w, so F5 is not pre-maximal.
Hence h∆new (w) = 0, so L∆new (w) < L∆ (v) and thus condition (i) holds.
   The map φ∗ has 2 new cells of type 5, one of which is F5 . We already checked con-
dition (ii) for F5 , and verification of (ii) for the other cell is analogous. Thus φ∗ is a
reduction by Lemma 5.17.
   Type 5GB. As in the one-dimensional setting, we set I = {1, 2, 3} and assume that
vI = (a, b, c) and the other three vertices of F have I-traces (a, b − a, c), (a, b, c − a) and
(a, b − a, c − a). We consider 4 subcases.
   Subcase 1: b is unrestricted. In this case we define φ as in the one-dimensional setting.
Every new vertex of φ∗ can be obtained from an old vertex by adding/subtracting the
unrestricted second column b to/from other columns and signed permutations of columns,
so φ∗ is k-safe by Lemma 5.21. One can prove that φ∗ is a reduction as in the one-
dimensional setting.
   Subcase 2: b is restricted and b − a is unrestricted. Note that in this subcase a must
also be restricted. Again we define φ as in the one-dimensional setting. Up to a signed
permutation of columns, φ∗ has 3 new vertices whose I-traces are (a − b, b, c), (a − b, b, b +
c − a) and (a − b, b, c − a). The first vertex is obtained from the old vertex (a, b, c, ∗) by
replacing the restricted first column a by a − b (which is unrestricted by assumption). The
third vertex is obtained from the old vertex (a, b, c − a, ∗) in the same way. Finally, the
second vertex is obtained from (a, b, c, ∗) by replacing the restricted first column a by a − b
and then subtracting the unrestricted first column a − b from the third column. All of
these operations come from the list in Lemma 5.21, so φ∗ is k-safe. As in subcase 1, φ∗ is
a reduction by the same argument as in the one-dimensional setting.
        ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                    65


                  Type 5, GB, higher-dimensional setting: l(∂F ) = [R12 , L13 ]
    (a, b − a, c)                                                                                             (a, b − a, c − a)
                                                                 L13
                                                                                                      L41
                  L41

                         (a − d, b − a, c)         (a − d, b − a, c − a + d)         (a − d, b − a, c − a)
                                             L13                               L43

                                  R12                           R12                             R12


           R12           (a − d, b − d, c)         (a − d, b − d, c − a + d)         (a − d, b − d, c − a)         R12
                                             L13                               L43

                                  L41                                                           L41


                           (a, b − d, c)                                               (a, b − d, c − a)
                                                                 L13
                                                                                                             L42
                        L42

      (a, b, c)                                                                                                 (a, b, c − a)
                                                                 L13



                         Figure 36. Only the first three coordinates are listed

   Subcase 3: c or c − a is unrestricted. This subcase is reduced to subcases 1 and 2 by
swapping the roles of the 2nd and 3rd columns.
   Subcase 4: b, c, b−a and c−a are all restricted. In this case we define φ∗ by a completely
different diagram given in Figure 36. Here d denotes the common 4th column of the vertices
of F. By symmetry we can assume that either b and c are non-maximal or b is maximal.
   All new vertices with first column a − d are smaller than v by Lemma 5.19(a). If b is
maximal, the same is true for the remaining two new vertices (whose first 2 columns are a
and b − d) and hence φ∗ is a reduction by Lemma 5.19(b). On the other hand, if neither
b nor c is maximal, it is straightforward to check that the cell F is purely maximal, and
we can prove that φ∗ is a reduction similarly to type 5GA.
Multiple-cell reductions. We now discuss a minor change in the construction of double-
cell and triple-cell reductions. It only affects type GB (the good coordinate case for the
groups IACn,d ). Recall that v is a fixed maximal vertex with at least C + 1 good columns
and the first column of v is maximal with positive k th coordinate.
   As in the one-dimensional setting, we can get to the stage where all the remaining
cells containing v have type 4, 7 or are not essential. However, at the next step (whose
one-dimensional counterpart was described in § 4.3) we need some extra care since our
definition of the single-cell reductions for cells of type 4GB in the higher-dimensional
setting depends on additional data.
   It will convenient to introduce the following definition.
Definition 5.23. Let e be an edge containing v with l(e) = Ri1 or Li1 for some i. We
will say that e is problematic for v if the k th coordinate of the ith column of v is 0.
   If there are no problematic edges for v, we can continue the process and eventually
eliminate v as in the one-dimensional setting. On the other hand, if e is a problematic
edge and F and F ′ are the two cells containing v, then the first columns of all the vertices
of G = F ∪ F ′ have non-negative first coordinate. Hence if j is any good index not in
66                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

                      ±1
supp (G), then CG (Rj1   ) is a double-cell reduction (for a suitable choice of sign) which
replaces e by a non-problematic edge. Applying this operation finitely many times, we
can eliminate all problematic edges and then proceed as before. This completes the proof
in Case 3.
   Case 4: v has at least C + 1 0-columns.
   Here it is crucial that v has at least one good column (see Observation 5.22 above).
Unlike Case 3, we will only describe single-cell reductions, as there are no non-trivial
changes in the construction of multiple-cell reductions. Thus we fix a cell F containing
v. As in the one-dimensional seeting, we can assume that the first column is good with
positive k th coordinate, the fourth column is zero and 4 ̸∈ supp(F ).
   Before proceeding, we introduce a technical definition.
Definition 5.24. Let ψ be a diagram map and 1 ≤ i ≤ n. We will say that ψ is a
ZSi -map (where ZS stands for zero substitution) if for every new vertex w′ of ψ there is
an old vertex w such that coli (w) = 0 and w′ is obtained from w by replacing 0 by c in
the ith column where c is a column of some old vertex of ψ. If ψ is a ZSi map, the set of
the ith columns of the new vertices will be called the substitution set of ψ and denoted by
Subi (ψ).
     Here is a simple criterion for a ZSi map to be k-safe and to be a reduction.
Observation 5.25. Let ψ be a ZSi map.
      (a) If every element of Subi (ψ) is unrestricted, then ψ is k-safe.
      (b) If every element of Subi (ψ) is good, then ψ is a k-safe reduction.
Proof. (a) holds by Lemma 5.21 as the hypothesis of (a) implies that every new vertex of ψ
is obtained from an old vertex by an operation of type (d) in the statement of Lemma 5.21.
   (b) ψ is k-safe by (a) and a reduction by Lemma 5.20(a).                              □
Remark. Even if neither part of Observation 5.25 is applicable to a ZSi map ψ, one can
still use the same idea to shorten verification of the fact that ψ is a reduction or that ψ is
k-safe. In particular, if ψ : ∆ → ∆1 is a ZSi map and v is a maximal vertex of ∆, to prove
that ψ is a reduction it suffices to check that w < v for every new vertex w which has a
restricted ith column. Likewise, to prove that ψ is k-safe it suffices to check that every
new vertex with restricted ith column can be obtained from an old vertex using operations
from Lemma 5.21.
   In the one-dimensional setting, the single-cell reduction φ we used in the zero coordinate
case was a ZS4 map with the exception of type 5ZA. Moreover, we were able to prove
that φ is a reduction using Observation 5.25(b) (even though we did not formally refer to
the latter).
   Let us resume the proof of Proposition 5.12. Fix a cell type, and let φ be the reduction
used for that type in the one-dimensional setting, and as before, let φ∗ be the lift of φ.
Apart from type 5ZA, φ is a ZS4 map, whence φ∗ is also a ZS4 map. A straightforward
verification shows that for most cell types, all elements of Sub4 (φ∗ ) are good (and this
can be proved exactly as in the one-dimensional setting), so that φ∗ is a k-safe reduction
by Observation 5.25(b). The only exceptions are the types 1ZA, 2ZA, 2ZB, 3ZB and 5ZB
(in addition to type 5ZA we excluded earlier), and these types will be treated separately
below.
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                     67

   For types 1ZA, 2ZA, 2ZB, 3ZB we will use the same map φ∗ , but to prove that φ∗ is a
k-safe reduction we will use the remark following Observation 5.25 rather than Observa-
tion 5.25 itself. For type 5ZB, we will slightly modify the map used in the one-dimensional
setting, but the rest of the argument will still be quite similar.
   Finally, type 5ZA does not require any special treatment, and we can use the same φ
is in the one-dimensional setting. Even though φ∗ is not a ZS4 map in this case, one can
prove that φ∗ is a k-safe reduction similarly to the one-dimensional setting.            □
                                Exceptional types (Case 4)
  In the discussion below by saying that an element of Zd is good (resp. bad) we will
mean that it is ∆-good (resp. ∆-bad). Also recall that v denotes the (chosen) maximal
vertex of F and we assume that col1 (v) is good while col4 (v) = 0.
  For types 1ZA, 2ZA, 2ZB and 3ZB our definition of the reduction map in the one-
dimensional setting was dependent on whether a particular coordinate of v is good or bad
(namely, the 3rd coordinate for types 1ZA, 2ZA and 3ZB and the 2nd coordinate for type
2ZB), and in the case where that coordinate is good we argued that a certain commuting
map is a reduction. An analogous argument shows that in the higher-dimensional setting
the same commuting map is a k-safe reduction provided the respective column of v is
good, so from now on we will assume that
     • for types 1ZA, 2ZA and 3ZB the 3rd column of v is bad and
     • for type 2ZB the 2nd column of v is bad.
   Type 1ZA, I = {1, 2, 4}. As in Figure 16, the cell F we are replacing (that is, the
domain of φ∗ ) has 5 vertices whose I-traces are (a, b, 0), (a + b, b, 0), (a + b, b + c, 0),
(a + b + c, b + c, 0) and (a, b + c, 0). The substitution set of φ∗ is {a, a + b, a + b + c}.
   Suppose first that v is one of the three vertices with second column b + c. Since these
three vertices only differ in the first column and v has a good first column, the other two
vertices from this triple must also have a good first column by Lemma 5.20(b). Therefore,
a, a + b and a + b + c are all good, and we are done by Observation 5.25.
   Now consider the remaining cases where vI = (a, b, 0) or (a + b, b, 0). Arguing as in the
previous paragraph, a and a + b are both good. Also recall that c is bad by the initial
assumption. If c and unrestricted, then a + b + c is also good, and we are done, so let us
assume that c is restricted, in which case a + b + c and b + c are also restricted. In this
case φ∗ has 2 new vertices with a new restricted column (namely restricted 4th column):
u1 = (a + b + c, b + c, c, a + b + c, ∗) and u2 = (a + b, b + c, c, a + b + c, ∗), and by the remark
following Observation 5.25 to finish the proof it suffices to check that
     (i) both u1 and u2 are obtained from an old vertex using operations from Lemma 5.21
         (this will prove that φ∗ is k-safe);
    (ii) u1 < v and u2 < v (this will prove that φ∗ is a reduction).
To prove (i) we just note that u1 is obtained from the old vertex u0 = (a+b+c, b+c, c, 0, ∗)
by replacing 0 by a + b + c in the 4th column (operation (c) in Lemma 5.21) while u2 is
obtained from the same vertex u0 by replacing 0 by the good vector a+b in the 4th column
(operation (d)) followed by a permutation of coordinates (operation (a)).
   Let us now prove (ii). Recall that a + b + c and b + c are both restricted. In particular
(a, b + c, 0) and (a + b, b + c, 0) are both vertices of FI with a restricted column among
the first two. Since the first two columns of v are unrestricted and the first one is good
while v is maximal, the only possibility is that the second column of v (which we know
68                                       MIKHAIL ERSHOV

is equal to b) is maximal. Thus, bk = ±M , and without loss of generality we can assume
that bk = M .
   Since (u1 )I = (a + b + c, b + c, a + b + c) and (u2 )I = (a + b, b + c, a + b + c), to prove (ii)
it will be enough to show that none of the columns a + b, b + c and a + b + c is maximal
(since we already showed that the second column of v is maximal). We already know that
a + b is good (and hence not maximal). If b + c is maximal, then vI < (a + b + c, b + c, 0), a
contradiction. Finally suppose that a + b + c is maximal. Since b is maximal and a is good
(in particular not maximal), (a + b + c)k = M whence ck = −ak . Since (a + b)k = M + ak
and (b + c)k = bk + ck = M − ak and (a + b)k , (b + c)k ≤ M , we must have ak = 0, contrary
to the assumption that a is good.
   For the types 2ZA, 2ZB and 3ZB one can prove that the map φ∗ as defined below
is k-safe similarly to type 1ZA. Thus, for those types we will only explain why φ∗ is a
reduction.
   Type 2ZA, I = {1, 2, 4}. The vertices of FI are (a, b, 0), (a + c, b, 0), (a, a + b, 0), (a +
c, a + b, 0) and (a + c, a + b + c, 0), and we assume that c is bad. We define φ is in Figure 17,
so that Sub(φ∗ ) = {a, a + c}.
   If vI equals any of the first 4 vertices in the above list, arguing as in type 1ZA, we
conclude that a and a + c are both good, and we are done, so assume from now on that
vI = (a + c, a + b + c, 0). This means that a + c is good. Since c is bad, if it is also
unrestricted, then a = (a + c) − c is good, and we are done, so let us assume that c is
restricted, in which case a is also restricted.
   The only new vertices which have a as their 4th column have I-traces (a, b, a), (a, a+b, a)
and (a + c, b, a). To prove that these vertices are < v, it suffices to show that vI has a
maximal column while none of a, b and a + b is maximal (we already know that a + c is
good and hence not maximal).
   Since a is restricted and a + c is unrestricted, (a, b, 0) has more restricted columns than
vI = (a + c, a + b + c, 0). Since v is maximal and has good first column, this is only
possible if a and b are not maximal and a + b + c is maximal. And if a + b is maximal, we
have vI = (a + c, a + b + c, 0) < (a, a + b, 0), a contradiction. Thus a, b and a + b are all
non-maximal and a + b + c = col2 (v) is maximal, as desired.
   Type 2ZB, I = {1, 3, 4}. The vertices of FI are (a, c, 0), (a + b, c, 0), (a, a + b + c, 0),
(a + b, a + b + c, 0) and (a, b + c, 0), and this time we assume that b is bad. We will use
the diagram map φ∗ where φ is given by Figure 31. Thus, Sub(φ∗ ) = {a, a + b}.
   If vI is equal to any vertex other than (a, b + c, 0), then a and a + b are good by
Lemma 5.20(b), and we are done. Let us now assume that vI = (a, b + c, 0), in which case
a is still good. Since b is bad, if it is also unrestricted, then a + b is good, so again we are
done. Thus, we can assume that b is restricted, which means that a + b is also restricted.
The only new vertices which have a + b as their 4th column have I-traces (a + b, c, a + b)
and (a + b, a + b + c, a + b), and it suffices to show that vI = (a, b + c, 0) has a maximal
column while none of a + b, c and a + b + c is maximal.
   Note that (a + b, a + b + c, 0) has more restricted columns than vI = (a, b + c, 0) (since
a + b is restricted, while a is not and hence a + b + c and b + c are both restricted or both
unrestricted). Since (a + b, a + b + c, 0) ≤ (a, b + c, 0), this implies that (a, b + c, 0) has more
maximal columns than (a + b, a + b + c, 0). And since a is good (hence non-maximal), we
conclude that b + c is maximal and a + b and a + b + c are not maximal. If c is not maximal,
we are done, so assume that c is maximal. Since b + c is also maximal and |bk | ≤ M , we
        ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                         69


                                  Type 5, ZB: l(∂F ) = [R12 , L13 ], first map
    (b − a, c, 0)                                                                                                  (b − a, c − a, 0)
                                                             L13
                       L14                                                                                 R34


                          (b − a, c, a)                 (b − a, c, a − c)             (b − a, c − a, a − c)
                                                R34                          L13
           R12                    R12                              R12                               R12               R12

                             (b, c, a)                    (b, c, a − c)                 (b, c − a, a − c)
                                                R34                          L13
                 L14                                                                                             R34


     (b, c, 0)                                                                                                       (b, c − a, 0)
                                                             L13


                                  Type 5, ZB: ∂R = [R12 , L13 ], second map
    (b − a, c, 0)                                                                                                  (b − a, c − a, 0)
                                                             L13
                          L14                                                                          L43


                                (b − a, c, a)           (b − a, c − a, a)          (b − a, c − a, 0)
                                                  L43                       L14
           R12                            R12                      R12                      R12                        R12

                                   (b, c, a)              (b, c − a, a)              (b, c − a, 0)
                                                  L43                       L14
                    L14                                                                                      L43


     (b, c, 0)                                                                                                       (b, c − a, 0)
                                                             L13



                       Figure 37. In both cases coordinates 2, 3 and 4 are listed


have (b + c)k = ck whence bk = 0. But then (a, b + c) < (a + b, c) since these two vertices
have the same number of maximal columns while (a + b, c) has at least as many restricted
non-maximal columns as (a, b + c) and fewer good columns. This inequality contradicts
the assumption that vI = (a, b + c, 0).
   Type 3ZB, I = {1, 2, 4}. The vertices of FI are (a − c, b, 0), (a, b, 0), (a + b, b, 0),
(a + b, b + c, 0) and (a − c, b + c, 0), and we assume that c is bad. We will use the diagram
map φ∗ where φ is given by Figure 32. Thus, Sub(φ∗ ) = {a, a + b, a − c}.
   If vI = (∗, b, 0), then a, a + b, a − c are all good by Lemma 5.20(b), and we are done. So
let us assume that vI = (∗, b + c, 0), in which case a + b and a − c are still good. Since c
is bad, if it is also unrestricted, then a = (a − c) + c is good, and we are done.
   Thus we can assume that c is restricted. Since a + b and a − c are good, b + c =
(a + b) − (a − c) is unrestricted; on the other hand, a = (a − c) + c and b = (b + c) − c must
both be restricted. Since (a, b, 0) cannot be strictly larger than vI and vI = (x, b + c, 0)
where x ∈ {a + b, a − c} is good, b + c must be maximal while a and b are not maximal.
We also know that a + b is good (and hence non-maximal). Hence (a + b, b, a) < vI and
(a, b, a) < vI (as col2 (v) = b + c is maximal). Since (a + b, b, a) and (a, b, a) are precisely
the I-traces of the new vertices which have a as their 4th column, we are done.
   Type 5ZB, I = {2, 3, 4}. Unlike the one-dimensional setting, we will use one of the two
distinct maps shown in Figure 37, depending on the values of a, b and c. The first map is
the lift of the map in Figure 34 that we used for type 5ZB in the one-dimensional setting.
70                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV

   As in the one-dimensional setting, we can assume that v = (a, b, c, 0, ∗), so in particular
a is good.
   Suppose first that c is unrestricted, so a − c is also unrestricted. If a − c is bad, then
c = a − (a − c) is good, whence (a, b, c, 0, ∗) < (a, b, c − a, 0, ∗), a contradiction. Thus, a − c
is good, whence the first map in Figure 37 is a k-safe reduction by Observation 5.25(b).
   If b is unrestricted, we can apply the same argument swapping the roles of the second
and third columns. Suppose now that b and c are both restricted (so b−a and c−a are also
restricted). By symmetry, we can also assume that either b and c are both non-maximal
or c is maximal. We will show that the second map in Figure 37 (call it φ∗ ) is a reduction.
This map is also k-safe by Observation 5.25(a).
   We have Sub4 (φ∗ ) = {a, 0}. Recall that a is good, and the only new vertices of φ∗
whose fourth column is 0 have I-traces (b, c − a, 0) and (b − a, c − a, 0). If c is maximal,
both of these vertices are < v by Lemma 5.19(a), and we are done. And if b and c are both
non-maximal (and restricted by an earlier assumption), the cell F is purely maximal, in
which case φ∗ is a reduction by the same argument as in type 5GA.
5.3. Step 2. The main result of Step 2 is the following theorem:
Theorem 5.26 (Step 2). There exists a super-Artinian order (called Step 2 order) with
the following property. For any diagram Ω′ satisfying the conclusion of Step 1, there exists
a k-safe reduction Ω′ → Ω′′ (with respect to the Step 2 order) such that Ω′′ is (k − 1)-
unimodular.
   Before defining the Step 2 order, let us introduce a total order ≺ on the set of subgroups
of Zm (below we will use this order for different values of m). The precise definition will
not be important for our purposes, and the only properties relevant for the proof are
     (i) ≺ refines the order by inclusion;
    (ii) ≺ is Noetherian (that is, there are no infinite strictly ascending chains).
   First, for each t ∈ N choose a total order on Zt which refines the ℓ1 -norm. Since ℓ1 -balls
are finite, this order is automatically Artinian.
   Now let A be a nonzero subgroup of Zm for some m, and let r = rk(A). Viewing
r-tuples of elements of Zm as elements of Zmr , define the norm of A, denoted by N (A),
to be the smallest r-tuple in A consisting of linearly independent vectors (with respect to
the above order on Zt for t = mr). Given two subgroups A and A′ , we set A ≺ A′ if either
rk(A) < rk(A′ ) or rk(A) = rk(A′ ) and N (A′ ) < N (A). It remains to define the order on
the set of subgroups with fixed rank and fixed norm.
   Fix r ∈ N and an r-tuple S consisting of linearly independent vectors. Then any
subgroup of rank r and norm S contains ZS (the Z-span of S) and is contained in QS ∩Zm .
Since ZS is a finite index subgroup of QS ∩ Zm , the subset of such subgroups is finite,
and we choose an arbitrary order on this subset refining the inclusion order. We have now
defined a total order on the set of subgroups of Zm , and it is clear from the construction
that it satisfies (i) and (ii) above.
   Next we introduce the notions of the active and semi-active subgroups of a vertex v,
denoted by A(v) and SA(v), respectively:
Definition 5.27. Let v ∈ M atd×n (Z). The subgroup of Zk−1 generated by the (k − 1)-
columns of v will be called the active subgroup of v and denoted by A(v).
Remark. A diagram Ω is (k − 1)-unimodular if and only if A(v) = Zk−1 for every v ∈
V (Ω).
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )             71

  We now define the semi-active subgroup of v denoted by SA(v).
Definition 5.28. Consider the equivalence relation ∼ on Zk where y ∼ z ⇐⇒ y − z ∈
A(v).
   (a) An equivalence class of k-vectors will be called frequent if it does not lie in A(v)
       (that is, its elements have depth exactly k) and v contains at least C + 1 columns
       from that class (these columns need not be distinct as elements of Zd ).
   (b) The semi-active subgroup SA(v) is the subgroup generated by A(v) and all columns
       from frequent classes (clearly, it suffices to take just one column from each class).
       Thus, A(v) ⊆ SA(v) ⊆ Zk .
   As in Step 1, the new order will take into account the number of restricted columns.
Good columns will not play any role in this step. Indeed, by assumption all vertices of Ω′
(the diagram obtained at the end of Step 1) have k th row of norm 1 and thus cannot have
any good columns. Instead we will be tracking the number of helpful columns:
Definition 5.29. Let v ∈ M atd×n (Z) and c ∈ Zd . We will say that
    (*) c is v-helpful if c is unrestricted and c ̸∈ SA(v);
If c is a column of v and c is v-helpful, we will say that c is a helpful column of v.
   We are now ready to define the new order on the vertices. As before, we compare two
vertices by successively applying the following criteria (and stop as soon as one of the
criteria is applicable).
Step 2 order: Similarly to the Step 1 order, we first define Step 2 pre-order based on the
vertex labels:
    (1) The vertex with the larger active subgroup is smaller.
    (2) The vertex with the larger semi-active subgroup is smaller.
    (3) The vertex with the larger number of helpful columns is smaller
    (4) The vertex with the larger number of (k − 1)-columns is smaller.
    (5) The vertex with the smaller number of restricted columns is smaller.
    (6) The vertex v with the smaller value of the vector
                     (∥rowk (v ur )∥1 , ∥rowk−1 (v ur )∥1 , . . . , ∥row1 (v ur )∥1 )
        is smaller (with respect to the lexicographical order). Here v ur is defined as in
        Step 1 order.
We now define Step 2 order in terms of this pre-order exactly as in Step 1, except that
the notions of a pre-maximal vertex and a purely maximal cell are now taken with respect
to the Step 2 pre-order. Unlike Step 1, where extended labels were used to treat cells of
types 5GA, 5GB and 5ZB, in Step 2 extended labels will only be needed for type 5ZB.
   Our goal is to prove the following proposition:
Proposition 5.30. Let Λ be a diagram which is k-unimodular, but not (k−1)-unimodular.
Also assume that defk (Λ) ≤ n − (C 2 + 3C + k + 3) and ∥rowk (Λ)∥ = 1. Then for any
vertex v of Λ which is maximal relative to the Step 2 order there exists a k-safe reduction
Λ → Λ′ which eliminates v.
  Before proving Proposition 5.30, let us deduce Theorem 5.26 from it.
Proof of Theorem 5.26. By assumption, Ω′ satisfies the conclusion of Theorem 5.11, so
∥rowk (Ω′ )∥ = 1 and defk (Ω′ ) ≤ d − k + 2C. Since d ≤ n − (C 2 + 6C + 3), we have
72                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

defk (Ω′ ) ≤ n − (C 2 + 4C + k + 3). Thus either Ω′ is (k − 1)-unimodular and there is
nothing to prove or Proposition 5.30 is applicable to Λ = Ω′ . Let us proceed with the
latter case.
   Let Λ1 be the diagram obtained by applying Proposition 5.30 to Ω′ , and let Λ2 be
obtained by applying Proposition 5.13 to Λ1 (it is possible that Λ2 = Λ1 ), so that
defk (Λ2 ) ≤ wdefk (Λ2 ) + C. Proposition 5.13 only asserts that the map Λ1 → Λ2 is a
reduction relative to the Step 1 order, but it follows immediately from the proof that this
map is also a reduction relative to the Step 2 order, so the composite map Ω′ → Λ2 is also
a reduction relative to the Step 2 order.
   By construction, the composite map Ω′ → Λ2 is k-safe, so we have ∥rowk (Λ2 )∥ ≤
∥rowk (Ω′ )∥ = 1 (and hence ∥rowk (Λ2 )∥ = 1 since a unimodular diagram cannot have a
zero row) and
               wdefk (Λ2 ) ≤ wdefk (Ω′ ) ≤ defk (Ω′ ) ≤ n − (C 2 + 4C + k + 3),
whence defk (Λ2 ) ≤ n − (C 2 + 3C + k + 3). Thus, either Λ2 is (k − 1)-unimodular (and we
are done) or we can apply Proposition 5.30 to Λ = Λ2 and keep going.
   Since the Step 2 order is Artinian, by Lemma 2.14 the process will terminate after
finitely many steps, that is, we will obtain a (k − 1)-unimodular diagram, call it Ω′′ .
   The obtained map Ω′ → Ω′′ is a composition of k-safe reductions (relative to the Step 2
order) and thus is itself a k-safe reduction, as desired.                                □

  Next we state and prove suitable counterparts of Lemmas 5.19 and 5.20 which will
be applicable to the Step 2 order. It will be convenient to introduce one more technical
definition.
Definition 5.31. Let v, w ∈ Zd . We will say that w is v-soft if either A(w) > A(v) or
A(w) = A(v) but S(w) > S(v).
  Equivalently, w is v-soft if w < v (relative to the Step 2 pre-order) and the inequality
can be checked using one of the first 2 criteria in the Step 2 pre-order.
Lemma 5.32. Let ∆ be a diagram, v a maximal vertex of ∆ and J a subset of {1, . . . , n}.
Let w be any vertex of ∆ such that coli (w) = coli (v) for all i ̸∈ J. The following hold:
     (a) If colj (w) is restricted for all j ∈ J, then coij (v) is restricted for all j ∈ J.
     (b) Assume that colj (v) is helpful for all j ∈ J. Then either w is v-soft or S(v) = S(w)
         and colj (w) is v-helpful for all j ∈ J.
Remark. We will primarily apply Lemma 5.32 in the case |J| = 1.
Proof. (a) Let j ∈ J. Since colj (w) is restricted, it cannot contribute to the active or semi-
active subgroups of w, the number of helpful columns or the number of (k − 1)-columns.
Since coli (w) = coli (v) for all i ̸∈ J, we cannot prove that w > v using the first 4 criteria
of the Step 2 order. If in addition colj (v) is unrestricted for some j ∈ J, then w has
more restricted columns than v and thus w > v (by criterion 5 in the Step 2 order), a
contradiction.
   (b) Suppose w is not v-soft. Since v is maximal, we must have A(w) = A(v) and
S(w) = S(v). If colj (w) is not v-helpful for some j ∈ J, it is also not w-helpful (as
S(w) = S(v)), so w has fewer helpful columns than v, and hence w > v (by criterion 3 in
the Step 2 order), a contradiction.                                                          □
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                73

Lemma 5.33. Let ψ : ∆ → ∆1 be a diagram map and v be a maximal vertex of ∆. The
following hold:
    (a) Let w′ be a new vertex of ψ. Suppose that w′ is obtained from an old vertex w by
        replacing a zero column by some c ∈ Zd where either
          (i) w is v-soft or
         (ii) c is v-helpful.
        Then w′ < v.
    (b) Suppose that ψ is a ZSi map for some i (see Definition 5.24) and all elements of
        Subi (ψ) are v-helpful. Then ψ is a reduction.
Proof. (a) Since a zero column does not contribute to the active or semi-active subgroups,
we have A(w′ ) ≥ A(w) and S(w′ ) ≥ S(w). If one of these inequalities is strict or if
w is v-soft, then w′ is v-soft and hence w′ < v. Otherwise, c is v-helpful and we have
A(w′ ) = A(w) = A(v) and S(w′ ) = S(w) = S(v), whence c is also w′ -helpful. Thus w′ has
more helpful columns than w, so again w′ < w and hence w′ < v.
  (b) follows directly from (a).                                                        □
  We are now ready to prove Proposition 5.30.
Proof of Proposition 5.30. Since Λ is not (k − 1)-unimodular, A(w) ̸= Zk−1 for some
w ∈ V (Λ). Since v is a maximal vertex of Λ, by definition of the Step 2 order we must
have A(v) ̸= Zk−1 .
   We will consider 4 cases. Lemmas 5.32 and 5.33 will only be needed in the most
technically demanding Case 4. Recall that C is a fixed constant with the property that
for any gallery ∆ of length ≤ 3 we have |supp (∆)| ≤ C.
   Case 1: SA(v) = Zk .        Since A(v) ̸= Zk−1 and SA(v) is generated by A(v) and
representatives of frequent classes of v, there must be at least two frequent classes. Recall
that each frequent class contains at least C +1 columns. This means that for any gallery G
at v of length min(3, deg (v)), we can find distinct indices i, j ̸∈ supp(G) such that coli (v)
and colj (v) are representatives of distinct frequent classes of v.
   Recall that ∥rowk (v)∥ = 1 by assumption. Both coli (v) and colj (v) have depth exactly
k (since they lie in frequent classes), so vki and vkj (the (k, i) and (k, j) entries of v) are
both equal to ±1. Multiplying coli (v) or colj (v) by −1 if needed, we can assume that
vki = vkj .
   Let φ = CG (Rij ) or CG (R−1 ) depending on whether H = IAR
                             ji
                                                                ^    n,d or IACn,d . Then every
                                                                             ^
new vertex of φ has coli (v) − colj (v) as its ith column (and coincides with one of the old
vertices in the remaining columns). By construction, coli (v) − colj (v) is a (k − 1)-column
which does not lie in A(v), so all new vertices of φ have active subgroup larger than A(v)
and hence φ is a reduction (relative to Step 2 order). It is also routine to check that φ is
k-safe. Since φ also decreases the degree of v, we can eliminate v repeating this operation
finitely many times. This completes the proof in case 1.
   Let us now assume that SA(v) ̸= Zk . Since v is k-unimodular (as Λ is k-unimodular),
this means that v has at least one helpful column. Since defk (v) ≤ n − (C 2 + 3C + k + 3),
one of the following must hold:
     (ii) v has at least C + k columns of depth between 1 and k − 1;
    (iii) v has at least C 2 + C + 4 columns of depth k;
    (iv) v has at least C + 1 zero columns.
74                                     MIKHAIL ERSHOV

We consider these 3 cases separately.
    Case 2: SA(v) ̸= Zk and v has at least C + k columns of depth between 1 and k − 1. We
will not make any use of the condition SA(v) ̸= Zk in this case. As in Case 1, take any
gallery G at v of length min(3, deg (v)). By the hypotheses in this case, there exist distinct
i, j ̸∈ supp (G) such that coli (v) and colj (v) have the same depth m with 1 ≤ m ≤ k − 1.
                                                       ±1           ±1
    Let φ be one of the 4 commuting maps CG (Rij          ) or CG (Rji ). Every new vertex w′ of
φ is obtained from an old vertex w by replacing the ith or j th column by coli (w) ± colj (w)
or colj (w) ± coli (w). In all cases w and w′ are incomparable based on criteria (1)-(5) in
                                         ±1           ±1
Step 2 order, and for some φ ∈ {CG (Rij      ), CG (Rji  )} (chosen independently of w) we have
            ′ ur                 ur                 ′
∥rowm ((w ) )∥1 < ∥rowm (w )∥1 , whence w < w, so φ is a reduction, and again it is
straightforward to check that φ is k-safe. Since φ decreases the degree of v, we are done
as in Case 1.
    Case 3: SA(v) ̸= Zk and v has at least C 2 + C + 4 columns of depth (exactly) k. If there
are at least 2 frequent classes or at least C + 2 distinct classes (mod A(v)) of columns of
depth k, there exist distinct indices i, j ̸∈ supp (G) such that coli (v) and colj (v) both have
depth k and belong to distinct classes, and we can argue exactly as in Case 1.
    Thus, we can assume that there are at most C + 1 distinct classes of columns of depth
k, and among these classes there is at most one frequent class. Since a non-frequent class
has at most C representatives while v has at least C 2 +C +4 columns of depth k, it follows
that one of the classes (which in particular has to be frequent) must have at least C + 4
representatives. Let us denote this class by C.
    Given a gallery G at v of length min(3, deg (v)), we can find distinct i, j ̸∈ supp (G) such
                                                                                             ±1
that coli (v) and colj (v) lie in C. As before, one of the commuting maps ψ = CG (Rij           )
has the property that every new vertex w′ is obtained from an old vertex w by replacing
a column of depth k (equal to either coli (w) = coli (v) or colj (v) = colj (v)) by a (k − 1)-
column. Such ψ is k-safe, similarly to previous cases. Without loss of generality, we can
assume that coli (w) = coli (v) is the column that is being replaced. We claim that w′ < v
for every new vertex w′ , so that ψ is a reduction. We consider two subcases:
    Subcase 1: A(w) > A(v) (where w is as above). Since w′ is obtained from w by
removing a column of depth k (which does not contribute to the active subgroup), we
have A(w′ ) ≥ A(w) > A(v), so w′ < v.
    Subcase 2: A(w) = A(v). If A(w′ ) > A(w), we are done, so assume from now on that
A(w′ ) = A(w) = A(v). This means that the equivalence relation defining the equivalence
classes of k-columns is the same for v, w and w′ .
    We first claim that SA(w′ ) ≥ SA(w). Since w′ and w only differ in the ith column, it
suffices to show that the class of coli (v) is frequent for w′ as well. The latter holds since
w′ differs from w in at most 3 columns and by assumption the class of coli (v) has C + 4
representatives for v.
    The same argument shows that the ith column of w is not helpful, so either SA(w′ ) >
SA(w) (in which case we are done) or SA(w′ ) = SA(w) and w′ and w have the same
number of helpful columns. In the latter case, w′ and w cannot be separated by the first 3
criteria of the Step 2 order, but w′ has more (k − 1)-columns, so w′ < w and hence w′ < v.
   Case 4: SA(v) ̸= Zk and v has at least C + 1 0-columns. In this case we will use the
same maps as in Case 4 of Step 1, but the role of good columns will be played by v-helpful
columns (recall that v has at least one helpful column). We already know from Step 1
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                    75

that these maps are k-safe. Showing that they are also reductions (now with respect to
Step 2 order) requires a new proof, although the arguments for most cell types are quite
similar. Below we explicitly consider the types which were exceptional in Step 1, namely
1ZA, 2ZA, 2ZB, 3ZB and 5ZB. For the remaining types, the argument in Step 1 relied
primarily on the fact that ∆-good columns form the complement of a subgroup inside the
group of unrestricted columns, and the latter property is shared by the set of v-helpful
columns.
   As in Case 4 of Step 1, we fix a cell F containing v and permute the columns so that
col1 (v) is helpful (and in particular unrestricted), col4 (v) = 0 and 4 ̸∈ supp(F).
   Type 1ZA. Recall that I = {1, 2, 4} and FI has vertices (a, b, 0), (a+b, b, 0), (a+b, b+c, 0),
(a + b + c, b + c, 0) and (a, b + c, 0). First we prove that a, b and c must be unrestricted. If
vI = (∗, b+c, 0), Lemma 5.32(a) applied with J = {1} implies that a, a+b and a+b+c are
unrestricted and hence b and c are also unrestricted. If vI = (∗, b, 0), we can still deduce
from Lemma 5.32(a) that a and b are unrestricted. And if c is restricted, then b + c is also
restricted, whence (a, b + c, 0) > (a, b, 0) and (a + b, b + c, 0) > (a + b, b, 0), contrary to the
assumption that vI = (∗, b, 0).
   If c is v-helpful, the commuting map CF (R34 ) is a reduction by Lemma 5.33(b), so from
now on we can assume that c is not v-helpful and thus c ∈ S(v) (as c is unrestricted). We
will show that if φ is the map in Figure 16, then φ∗ is a reduction.
   Subcase 1: col2 (v) ∈ S(v). Since col2 (v) equals b and b + c and c ∈ S(v), in either case
we must have b, c ∈ S(v). This means that a, a + b and a + b + c are all v-helpful or none of
them is v-helpful, and the latter is impossible since col1 (v) is helpful by assumption. Thus,
all elements of Sub4 (φ∗ ) = {a, a + b, a + b + c} are v-helpful and hence φ∗ is a reduction
by Lemma 5.33(b).
   Subcase 2: col2 (v) ̸∈ S(v). Since b and c are unrestricted, this implies that col2 (v)
is helpful and hence the first 2 columns of v are helpful. Since v is maximal and every
vertex of F can only differ from v in the first 2 columns, applying Lemma 5.32(b) with
J = {1, 2}, we deduce that for any vertex w of F either

(5.1) (a) w is v-soft     or    (b) S(v) = S(w) and col1 (w) and col2 (w) are v-helpful.

The following claim can be checked by straightforward case-by-case verification. Let w′
be a new vertex of φ∗ . Then for any i ∈ I = {1, 2, 4} there exists a vertex wi of F such
that w′ can be obtained from wi by replacing a zero column by another vector, possibly
followed by a permutation of columns, and moreover coli (w′ ) equals one of the first two
columns of wi .
   If wi is v-soft for some i, then w′ < v by Lemma 5.33(a)(i). By (5.1), the only other
possibility is that the first two columns of wi are v-helpful for each i ∈ I. But this means
that coli (w′ ) is v-helpful for all i ∈ I and hence w′ < v by Lemma 5.33(a)(ii).
   Type 2ZA. Recall that I = {1, 2, 4} and the vertices of FI are (a, b, 0), (a + c, b, 0),
(a, a + b, 0), (a + c, a + b, 0) and (a + c, a + b + c, 0).
   First, if vI ̸= (a + c, a + b + c, 0), Lemma 5.32(a) applied with J = {1} implies that
a and a + c are unrestricted. Suppose now that vI = (a + c, a + b + c, 0), in which case
a + c is still unrestricted. And if a is restricted, the first two columns of either (a, b, 0) or
(a, a + b, 0) are restricted, and hence by Lemma 5.32(a) applied with J = {1, 2} the same
is true for v, a contradiction.
76                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV

   Thus, we proved that a and a + c are unrestricted and hence c is also unrestricted. If
c is v-helpful, the map CF (R43 ) is a reduction. And if c is not v-helpful, then c ∈ SA(v).
Since one of the vectors a, a + c must be v-helpful, they are both v-helpful. Hence if we
define φ as in Figure 17, then φ∗ is a ZS4 -map and all vectors of Sub4 (φ∗ ) = {a, a + c}
are v-helpful, so φ∗ is a reduction by Lemma 5.33(b).
   Type 2ZB. Recall that I = {1, 3, 4} and the vertices of FI are (a, c, 0), (a + b, c, 0),
(a, a + b + c, 0), (a + b, a + b + c, 0) and (a, b + c, 0). Similarly to Step 1, if b is v-helpful,
then CF (L24 ) is a reduction by Lemma 5.33(b). In the remaining cases we will use the
map φ∗ where φ is given by Figure 31. Recall that Sub4 (φ∗ ) = {a, a + b}.
   If b ∈ S(v), then both a and a + b are v-helpful (since one of them must be v-helpful),
and we are done by Lemma 5.33(b). Thus, we can assume that b is restricted, in which case
vI = (a, b + c, 0) (otherwise we get a contradiction with Lemma 5.32(a)), so in particular a
is unrestricted. If b + c is unrestricted, then c is restricted, whence (a, b + c, 0) < (a, c, 0),
a contradiction. And if b + c is restricted, then a + b and a + b + c are both restricted, so
(a, b + c, 0) < (a + b, a + b + c, 0), again a contradiction.
   Type 3ZB. Recall that I = {1, 2, 4} and the vertices of FI are (a − c, b, 0), (a, b, 0),
(a + b, b, 0), (a + b, b + c, 0) and (a − c, b + c, 0).
   First we claim that a, a + b and a − c are all unrestricted (whence b and c are also
unrestricted). If vI = (∗, b, 0), this is automatic by Lemma 5.32(a). Suppose now that
vI = (∗, b + c, 0). Lemma 5.32(a) still implies that a + b and a − c are both unrestricted,
whence so is b + c = (a + b) − (a − c). Thus the first two columns of v are unrestricted,
whence (by maximality of v) every vertex of F has at least one unrestricted column among
the first two; in particular, this is true for w = (a, b, 0, ∗). If a is restricted, then so is
b = (a + b) − a, a contradiction. Thus, a is unrestricted, and we are done.
   If c is v-helpful, CF (L34 ) is a reduction, so from now on we assume that c ∈ S(v). We
will use the diagram map φ∗ where φ is given by Figure 32.
   Subcase 1: b ∈ S(v). Since c ∈ S(v) as well, the vectors a, a − c and a + b are all
congruent modulo S(v), and since one of them is v-helpful, they must all be v-helpful, so
φ∗ is a reduction by Lemma 5.33(b).
   Subcase 2: b ̸∈ S(v). In this subcase b and b + c are both v-helpful. Hence the first two
columns of v are helpful, and we can finish the proof exactly as in Subcase 2 for type 1ZA.
   Type 5ZB. Recall that I = {2, 3, 4}, all vertices of F have the same first column a
(which thus must be v-helpful), vI = (b, c, 0), and the other 3 vertices of FI are (b−a, c, 0),
(b, c − a, 0) and (b − a, c − a, 0). As in Step 1, we will use one of the two maps in Figure 37.
   First suppose that c − a or b − a is v-helpful. By symmetry, we can assume that c − a
is v-helpful. In this case the first map in Figure 37 is a reduction by Lemma 5.33(b).
   Thus from now on we can assume that each of the vectors c − a and b − a either lies in
S(v) or is restricted. We consider several subcases.
   Subcase 1: c − a, b − a ∈ S(v). Since a is v-helpful, b and c must also be v-helpful.
Since v = (a, b, c, 0, ∗) is maximal, v only differs from other vertices of F in the 2nd and
3rd columns, and each of those vertices has a non-v-helpful 2nd or 3rd column, each of the
remaining vertices of F must be v-soft. Hence the first map in Figure 37 is a reduction
by Lemma 5.33(a)(i).
   Subcase 2: c − a ∈ S(v) while b − a is restricted or vice versa. Without loss of generality,
we can assume that c − a ∈ S(v) and b − a is restricted (in which case b is also restricted).
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                        77

In this case (a, b − a, c, 0, ∗) is also a maximal vertex while (a, b, c − a, 0, ∗) and (a, b − a, c −
a, 0, ∗) are v-soft by the same argument as in Subcase 1. Hence if φ∗ is the second map
in Figure 37, the four new vertices of φ∗ with 4th column a are < v by Lemma 5.33(a)(ii)
while the remaining two new vertices are v-soft, so φ∗ is a reduction.
   Subcase 3: c − a and b − a are both restricted. In this case F is a purely maximal cell,
and the second map in Figure 37 is a reduction by the argument we used for types 5GA,
5GB and 5ZB in Step 1.
   This concludes the proof in Case 4.                                                               □

5.4. Step 3. The goal in this final step is to reduce the (k − 1)-defect of the diagram
while preserving the (k − 1)-unimodularity property. Unfortunately, in order to achieve
the latter, we will have to allow the norms of the last d − k + 1 rows of the diagram to
increase; however, these norms will still stay uniformly bounded, which is sufficient for our
purposes. More precisely, our goal in this step is to prove the following result.
Theorem 5.34. There exist natural numbers 1 = Md+1 ≤ Md ≤ Md−1 ≤ · · · ≤ M1 with
the following property. Suppose that for some 1 ≤ k ≤ d we are given a diagram Λ such
that ∥botd−k+1 (Λ)∥ ≤ Mk+1 . Then there exists a diagram map Λ → Λ′ such that
    (a) defk−1 (Λ′ ) ≤ d − k + C + 1;
    (b) ∥botd−k+1 (Λ′ )∥ ≤ Mk ;
    (c) if Λ is (k − 1)-unimodular, then so is Λ′ .
  Before proving Theorem 5.34, let us deduce Theorem 5.8 from the main results of
Steps 1, 2 and 3 (Theorems 5.11, 5.26 and 5.34, respectively).

Proof of Theorem 5.8. We will prove that the assertion of Theorem 5.8 holds for the same
{Mi } as in Theorem 5.34. Let Ω be any diagram satisfying the hypotheses of Theorem 5.8,
that is,
    (a) Ω is k-unimodular;
    (b) defk (Ω) ≤ d − k + C;
    (c) if k < d, then ∥botd−k Ω∥ ≤ Mk+1 ;
    (d) Ω has small boundary.
   Let Ω → Ω′ and Ω′ → Ω′′ be the reductions from Step 1 (Theorem 5.11) and Step 2
(Theorem 5.26). By Theorem 5.11 we have ∥rowk (Ω′ )∥ = 1. Since both reductions are
k-safe, we have ∥rowk (Ω′′ )∥ ≤ ∥rowk (Ω′ )∥ = 1 and ∥botd−k Ω′′ ∥ ≤ ∥botd−k Ω∥ ≤ Mk+1 if
k < d. We have
   ∥botd−k+1 Ω′′ ∥ = max{∥botd−k Ω′′ ∥, ∥rowk Ω′′ ∥} ≤ max{Mk+1 , 1} = Mk+1              if k < d
                ′′            ′′            ′′
   ∥botd−k+1 Ω ∥ = ∥bot1 Ω ∥ = ∥rowd Ω ∥ = 1 = Md+1                                      if k = d.
Thus, ∥botd−k+1 Ω′′ ∥ ≤ Mk+1 regardless of the value of k, so we can apply Theorem 5.34
to Ω′′ . Since Ω′′ is (k − 1)-unimodular, Theorem 5.34 yields a diagram map Ω′′ → Ω′′′ such
that
    (a) defk−1 (Ω′′′ ) ≤ d − k + C + 1;
    (b) ∥botd−k+1 (Ω′′′ )∥ ≤ Mk .
    (c) Ω′′′ is (k − 1)-unimodular,
which proves Theorem 5.8.                                                                            □
78                                                MIKHAIL ERSHOV

Proof of Theorem 5.34. We will define the numbers Mi by downward induction. Recall
that we already set Md+1 = 1.
   In this proof we will use a completely different order. It will only take into account the
 1
ℓ -norms of the bottom d − k + 1 rows, but give different weights to different rows, with
the lower rows receiving much higher weight. Also, unlike Steps 1 and 2, we will explicitly
define a norm function which gives the order.
   Define a sequence of functions fd (xd ), fd−1 (xd , xd−1 ), . . ., fk (xd , . . . , xk ) inductively by
fd (xd ) = xd and fi (xd , . . . , xi ) = 3fi+1 (xd ,...,xi+1 ) · xi for k ≤ i ≤ d − 1. Now given a
matrix v ∈ M atd×n (Z), define N (v) = fk (xd , . . . , xk ) where xi = ∥rowi v∥1 . Finally, given
v, v ′ ∈ M atd×n (Z), set v < v ′ if and only if N (v) < N (v ′ ).
   Below we will prove that if a diagram Σ contains a vertex v with defk−1 (v) > (d −
k + 1) + C, there exists a reduction (with respect to the above order) Σ → Σ′ which
eliminates v and preserves (k − 1)-unimodularity. If this is proved, then by Lemma 2.14,
applying such reductions finitely many times (starting with Λ), we will obtain a (k − 1)-
unimodular diagram Λ′ such that defk−1 (Λ′ ) ≤ (d − k + 1) + C, so conditions (a) and
(c) from Proposition 5.34 hold. Moreover, we have ∥botd−k+1 (Λ′ )∥ ≤ N (Λ′ ) ≤ N (Λ) ≤
fk (Mk+1 , . . . , Mk+1 ), so if we set Mk = fk (Mk+1 , . . . , Mk+1 ), then (b) holds as well, and
the proof is complete.
   We now explain how to construct the desired reduction. Fix a vertex v with defk−1 (v) >
(d − k + 1) + C. Without loss of generality we can assume that v has maximal (k − 1)-
defect among all vertices. Choose any gallery G at v of length min(3, deg (v)). As before,
it suffices to construct a G-reduction at v. By assumption v has at least d − k + C + 2
columns of depth at least k, that is, of depth between k and d. Since there are d − k + 1
integers between k and d and |supp (G)| ≤ C, there exist distinct i, j ̸∈ supp(G) such that
coli (v) and colj (v) have the same depth m ≥ k. Without loss of generality we can assume
that vmi ≥ vmj > 0.
                                                                                −1
   Let φ be the commuting map CG (Rij ) if H = IAR             ^   n,d and CG (R ) if H = IACn,d . We
                                                                                         ji
                                                                                               ^
claim that φ has the desired properties. Since φ does not modify any of the (k−1)-columns,
it automatically preserves (k − 1)-unimodularity.
    It remains to prove that φ is a reduction. Any new vertex u arising from φ is obtained
from a vertex w of G by replacing coli (w) = coli (v) by coli (v) − colj (v). It is clear that
defk−1 (u) ≤ defk−1 (w) ≤ defk−1 (v). Also if we let xt = ∥rowt (u)∥1 and yt = ∥rowt (w)∥,
then by construction xt = yt for t > m, xm ≤ ym − 1 and xt ≤ 2yt for k ≤ t < m.
    Let us prove that ft (xd , . . . , xt ) ≤ ft (yd , . . . , yt ) − 1 for all 1 ≤ t ≤ m using down-
ward induction on t. The result is clear for t = m. Suppose now that ft (xd , . . . , xt ) ≤
ft (yd , . . . , yt ) − 1 for some 1 < t ≤ m. Then


     ft−1 (xd , . . . , xt−1 ) = 3ft (xd ,...,xt ) xt−1 ≤ 3ft (yd ,...,yt )−1 · 2yt−1
                                2                          2
                            = · 3ft (yd ,...,yt ) yt−1 = · ft−1 (yd , . . . , yt−1 ) ≤ ft−1 (yd , . . . , yt−1 ) − 1,
                                3                          3


where the last inequality holds since clearly fs (yd , . . . , ys ) ≥ 3 for all s < d.
  Applying the above inequality with t = k, we deduce that N (w) < N (v) for any new
vertex w, so φ is indeed a reduction, as desired.                                      □
       ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                    79

5.5. Proof of Proposition 5.6. We start by recalling the statement of Proposition 5.6
as well as the definition of a small subset (Definition 5.5), combined in the following
statement:
Proposition 5.35. There exists a finite subset A ⊂ G/H such that the preimage of A in
G is connected in Cay(G, X ) and A is small, that is, every v ∈ A satisfies the following
conditions:
     (i) ∥v∥ = 1;                                 
    (ii) v differs from the matrix Id×d | 0d×(n−d) in at most 8 columns;
   (iii) v is k-unimodular for all k ≤ d.
Proof. As before, let ρ : G → G/H and θ : F (X ) → G/H denote the natural projections.
Recall that we are identifying G/H with U md×n (Z) via the map from Lemma 2.26.
  An explicit formula for θ viewed as a map from F (X ) to U md×n (Z) is as follows.
Lemma 5.36. Given w ∈ F (X ), let [w] be its projection to SLn (Z). Then
   (i) θ(g) consists of the first d rows of [g]−1 if H = IAR
                                                          ^  n,d and
   (ii) θ(g) consists of the first d rows of [g]T if H = IAC
                                                          ^  n,d .

   We will prove Proposition 5.35 for H = IAR  ^  n,d ; the proof for H = IACn,d is quite
                                                                             ^
similar.
   As we explained in the proof of Proposition 2.3, if we are given an explicit finite subset
A of G/H such that ρ−1 (A) is connected in Cay(G, X ), it is easy to construct a finite
generating set for H in terms of A. In this proof we will proceed backwards, starting with
a finite generating set for H and using the following observation to construct A with the
above property.
                                                                                     ±1
Observation 5.37. Let SH be a finite generating set for H. For each s ∈ SH              choose a
lift se ∈ F (X ), let E be the set of all suffixes of those lifts and let A = θ(E). Then ρ−1 (A)
is connected in Cay(G, X ).
   In view of Observation 5.37, to prove Proposition 5.35 we just need to find a finite
                                                                       ±1
generating set SH for H with the following property: every s ∈ SH         admits a lift se ∈ F (X )
such that
    (*) θ(w) is small for any suffix w of se.
   We start by describing the finite generating set SH for H that we will be using. Recall
that H = IAR^  n,d is defined as the preimage of the subgroup Rown,d of SLn (Z) consisting
of matrices whose first d rows coincide with those of the identity matrix. Thus, if we
denote by IAgn the kernel of the projection G = SAut(F  ^n ) → SLn (Z), we can produce a
generating set for H by taking the union of a generating set for IA       gn and any subset of
  ^n ) which maps onto a generating set of Rown,d .
SAut(F
   Magnus [Ma35] showed that IAn is generated by the automorphisms Kij = (xi 7→
x−1
 j xi xj ) with i ̸= j and Kijk = (xi 7→ xi [xj , xk ]) with i, j, k distinct. The group IAn is
                                                                                            g
                                                                     −1                          4
generated by (chosen) preimages of these elements, e.g. Rij Lij and [Rij , Rik ], and w12
which generates the kernel of the map SAut(F^n ) → SAut(Fn ).
   The group Rown,d is generated by the elementary matrices Eji , i ̸= j, where 1 ≤ i ≤ n
and d + 1 ≤ 1 ≤ j ≤ n. As their preimages we can use the elements Rij with the same
80                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV

restrictions on i and j. Thus, the set {Rij L−1                                            4
                                             ij } ∪ {[Rij , Rik ]} ∪ {Rij : j ≥ d + 1} ∪ {w12 }
generates H and hence the set
          SH = {Rij L−1                                                       4
                     ij , [Rij , Rik ] : j ≤ d} ∪ {Lij , Rij : j ≥ d + 1} ∪ {w12 }          (∗ ∗ ∗)
also generates H.
   A simple way to ensure that a matrix v ∈ U md×n (Z) is k-unimodular for all k ≤ d is
to require that every element of the standard basis of Zd (denoted below by e1 , . . . , ed )
appears among the columns of v, up to sign. Thus, to prove Proposition 5.35 it suffices to
                        ±1
show that every s ∈ SH     admits a lift se such that every suffix w of se satisfies the following
two conditions:
    (1) for every 1 ≤ i ≤ d one of the columns of θ(w) is equal to ei or −ei ;                 
    (2) every entry of θ(w) is equal to 0 or ±1 and θ(w) differs from Id×d | 0d×(n−d) in
         at most 8 columns.
Clearly, we only need to consider generators of the form Rij L−1   ij and [Rij , Rik ] with j ≤ d
and their inverses.
   Let us first consider s = Rij L−1                e be the “natural” lift (that is, se = Rij L−1
                                     ij . If we let s                                            ij
where Lij and Rij are considered as elements of F (X )), it is easy to see that both (1) and
(2) holds for i > d, in which case for every suffix w of se, the matrix θ(w) is of the block
form (Id |0d×(n−d) ).
   If i ≤ d, the suffix L−1
                         ij still satisfies (2), but not (1), although it is not far off. Indeed,
by Lemma 5.36, the matrix θ(L−1     ij ) ∈ U md×n (Z) has the block form (Eji |0) where Eji is
the d × d elementary matrix having 1 in the (j, i)-entry. Thus, all elements of the standard
basis of Zd except ei are present among the columns of θ(Lij ). To fix this issue we replace
Rij L−1
      ij by a more involved word in F (X ) which has the same projection to G.

Claim 5.38. Fix integers k, m satisfying d < k < m ≤ n (recall that i ̸= j are both ≤ d,
so i, j, k and m are distinct) The following relation holds in G:
(5.2)                   Rij L−1    −1      −1 −1           −1 −1
                             ij = Rki Lmj Lmi Lmj Rij Rki Rkj Lij Lmi .

Proof. By assumption, i, j, k and m are distinct, and without loss of generality we can
assume that i = 1, j = 2, k = 3 and m = 4 (we do this for better readability; there are no
mathematical simplifications).
                               −1
   Using the basic relations R31  R12 R31 = R12 R32 and L−1
                                                         41 L12 L41 = L12 L42 (see Obser-
vation 2.23), we get R12 = R31 R12 R31 R32 and L12 = L−1
                                −1         −1                          −1            −1
                                                           41 L12 L41 L42 , whence L12 =
     −1 −1                     −1      −1         −1     −1 −1
L42 L41 L12 L41 and thus R12 L12 = R31 R12 R31 R32 L42 L41 L12 L41 . Since L42 commutes
with R12 , R31 and R32 and L41 commute with R31 and R32 , it follows that
                          R12 L−1    −1          −1      −1 −1
                               12 = R31 L42 R12 L41 R31 R32 L12 L41 .                       (∗ ∗ ∗)
From the relation L41 R12 L−1    −1                   −1    −1 −1
                           41 = L42 R12 , we get R12 L41 = L41 L42 R12 and hence

                    R12 L−1    −1       −1 −1            −1 −1
                         12 = R31 L42 (L41 L42 R12 )R31 R32 L12 L41 in G,
as desired.                                                                                      □
   We claim that the word on the right-hand side of (5.2) is a lift of s = Rij L−1    ij with
required properties, that is, all of its suffixes satisfy (1) and (2). The latter is shown in
the following table where again we assume that i = 1, j = 2, k = 3 and m = 4 and this
time also d = 2, n = 4.
           ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                   81

                                                            −1                  −1
 w             w0 = 1       w1 = L41           w2 = L12 w1       w3 = R32 w2     w4 = R31 w3 
              1 0 0 0         1 0 0 −1             1 0 0 −1            1 0 0 −1          1 0 −1 −1
θ(w)
              0 1 0 0         0 1 0 0              1 1 0 0             1 1 1 0           1 1 0       0

                             −1                           −1                                     −1
 w    w5 = R12 w4   w6 = L42 w5                w7 = L41 w6       w8 = L42 w7      w9 = R31 w8
      1 0 −1 −1       1 0 −1 −1                    1 0 −1 0            1 0 −1 0            1 0 0 0
θ(w)
      0 1 0       0   0 1 0      1                 0 1 0 1             0 1 0 0             0 1 0 0

       Similarly one can construct desired lifts of (Rij L−1
                                                          ij )
                                                               −1 = L R−1 .
                                                                     ij ij
   The lifts for s = [Rij , Rik ] are slightly easier to construct. As before, the natural lift
 works if i > d, so assume that i ≤ d, and fix m > d which is distinct from j and k.
                             Rmi                     Rmi
   Using the relations Rij        = Rij Rmj and Rik       = Rik Rmk , we get [Rij , Rik ]Rmi =
 [Rij Rmj , Rik Rmk ]. Since Rij and Rik both commute with Rmj and Rmk , we have
                             [Rij Rmj , Rik Rmk ] = [Rij , Rik ][Rmj , Rmk ],
 and therefore
                                             −1
 (5.3)                       [Rij , Rik ] = Rmi [Rij , Rik ]Rmi [Rmk , Rmj ].
 It is straightforward to check that all suffixes of the word on the right-hand side of (5.3)
 satisfy both (1) and (2), which finishes the proof.                                       □

                           6. Additional diagrams for the ZB case
    In this short section we will describe the single-cell reductions for types 8-11 for the
 group IACn,1 in the zero coordinate case (ZB case). As we already mentioned in § 4,
 the reduction diagrams will be identical to the GA case. For each type, the map de-
 scribed below is a reduction since each new vertex is obtained from an old vertex of a
 diagram Ω by replacing a zero coordinate by an Ω-good coordinate (this is a special case
 of Lemma 3.9(a)). But in order to show that Lemma 3.9(a) is applicable, we need to check
 that certain vertex coordinates are good, which is done below. We keep all the notations
 from § 3,4. In particular, F denotes the cell at which the reduction is being performed,
 and v denotes a chosen maximal of F .
    Type 9: l(∂F ) = (L21 L−1   12 R21 = w21 ), I = {1, 2, 4}. The vertices of FI are (a, b, 0), (a, b−
 a, 0), (b, b − a, 0), (a − b, b, 0). We consider 2 cases. If vI = (a, b, 0) or (a − b, b, 0), then by
 Lemma 3.9(b) a and a − b are both good whence the first map in Figure 38 is a reduction
 by Lemma 3.9(a). Likewise, if vI = (a, b − a, 0) or (b, b − a, 0), then a and b are good
 whence the second map in Figure 38 is a reduction.
     Type 8: l(∂F) = (L12 L−1  21 R12 = w12 ), I = {1, 2, 4}. The vertices of FI are (a, b, 0), (a −
 b, b, 0), (a−b, a, 0), (a, b−a, 0). If vI = (a, b, 0) or (a−b, b, 0), then a and a−b are both good,
 whence the first map in Figure 39 is a reduction. And if vI = (a − b, a, 0) or (a, b − a, 0),
 then F has a maximal vertex with a good second coordinate, whence by swapping the
 roles of the indices 1 and 2, we are reduced to type 8.
                          −1
    Type 10: l(∂F) = (w12    R12 w12 = L−121 ), I = {1, 2}. The vertices of FI are (a, b, 0), (b, −a, 0), (b−
 a, −a, 0) and (a, b − a, 0). If vI = (∗, −a, 0), then b and b − a are both good, whence the
 first map in Figure 40 is a reduction. If vI = (a, ∗, 0), then a is good, whence the second
 map in Figure 40 is a reduction.
82                                                            MIKHAIL ERSHOV

                                   Type 9, ZB: l(∂F ) = (L21 L−1  12 R21 = w21 )
                                   Case 1: vI = (∗, b, 0), a and a − b are good
                                                                         w21
     (a − b, b, 0)          R14                                                                                     L24           (b, b − a, 0)
                                                                         w21
                                       (a − b, b, a − b)                                    (b, b − a, a − b)
                                                                                                                R14
                                        R24
                                                                         w21
            R21       (a − b, b, a)                                                                             (b, b − a, a)      L21
                                        R21                                                            L21


                           R14             (a, b, a)                                          (a, b − a, a)           R14
                                                                        L12
       (a, b, 0)                                                                                                                  (a, b − a, 0)
                                                                        L12


                                   Case 2: vI = (∗, b − a, 0), a and b are good
                                                                         w21
     (a − b, b, 0)           L24                                                                                                  (b, b − a, 0)
                                                               w21                                              L14
                                         (a − b, b, b)                      (b, b − a, b)



            R21                                   R21                        L21                                                   L21




                           L24             (a, b, b)                        (a, b − a, b)                (a, b − a, a)      L14
                                                               L12                             L24
       (a, b, 0)                                                                                                                  (a, b − a, 0)
                                                                        L12



                                 Figure 38. Coordinates 1, 2 and 4 are listed

                       Type 8, ZB: l(∂F ) = (L12 L−1
                                                  21 R12 = w12 ), vI = (∗, b, 0)
                                                                         w12
     (a, b − a, 0)                                                                                                                (a − b, a, 0)
                           L14
                                                                                                              L24
                                                         w12
                                  (a, b − a, a)                      (a − b, a, a)

            R12                            R12                        R12                                                          L12

                                      (a, b, a)                      (a − b, b, a)               (a − b, b, a − b)
                                                        L21                            L24
                     L14
                                                                                                                      L14
       (a, b, 0)                                                                                                                  (a − b, b, 0)
                                                                        L21



                                 Figure 39. Coordinates 1,2 and 4 are listed

                          −1
   Type 11R: l(∂F ) = (w12   R13 w12 = R23 ), I = {1, 2, 3, 4}. As in type 11A, we will
assume that the edge labeled by w12 is incoming at v, which forces us to consider different
boundary label representatives depending on the support of the other edge at v. The maps
in both cases are shown in Figure 41. By assumption a is good in the first case and b is
good in the second case, so in both cases the map is a reduction Lemma 3.9(a).
        ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                                                          83

                                                         −1              −1
                            Type 10, ZB: l(∂F ) = (w12       L21 w12 = R12  ),
                     Case 1: vI = (b, −a, 0) or (b − a, −a, 0), b and b − a are good
     (a, b − a, 0)                                                                                                     (b − a, −a, 0)
                                                                 w12
                            L24            (a, b − a, b − a)           (b − a, −a, b − a)                  L14
                                                                 w12

                                          R12                                           L21
            R12      (a, b, b − a)                                                              (b, −a, b − a)           L21
                                                                 w12
                                          R14                                           L24

                                                                 w12
                           L24                    (a, b, b)                (b, −a, b)                L14

       (a, b, 0)                                                                                                         (b, −a, 0)
                                                                 w12

                                  Case 2: vI = (a, b, 0) or (a, b − a, 0), a is good
     (a, b − a, 0)                                                                                                     (b − a, −a, 0)
                                                                 w12
                           L14                                                                         R24


                                  (a, b − a, a)                                    (b − a, −a, a)
                                                                 w12
            R12                           R12                                           L21                              L21

                                     (a, b, a)                                          (b, −a, a)
                                                                 w12
                     L14                                                                                         R24


       (a, b, 0)                                                                                                         (b, −a, 0)
                                                                 w12



                                  Figure 40. Coordinates 1,2 and 4 are listed


                                                              References
[BNS87] Robert Bieri, Walter D. Neumann and Ralph Strebel, A geometric invariant of discrete groups.
        Invent. Math. 90 (1987), no. 3, 451–477.
[BR88] Robert Bieri and Burkhardt Renz, Valuations on free resolutions and higher geometric invariants
        of groups. Comment. Math. Helv. 63 (1988), no. 3, 464–497.
[Br84] Kenneth S. Brown, Presentations for groups acting on simply-connected complexes. J. Pure Appl.
        Algebra 32 (1984), no. 1, 1–10.
[Br87] Kenneth S. Brown, Finiteness properties of groups. Proceedings of the Northwestern conference
        on cohomology of groups (Evanston, Ill., 1985). J. Pure Appl. Algebra 44 (1987), no. 1–3, 45–75.
[D09]   Matthew Day, Peak reduction and finite presentations for automorphism groups of right-angled
        Artin groups. Geom. Topol. 13 (2009), no. 2, 817–855.
[D14]   Matthew Day, Full-featured peak reduction in right-angled Artin groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol. 14
        (2014), no. 3, 1677–1743.
[DP17] Matthew Day and Andrew Putman, On the second homology group of the Torelli subgroup of
        Aut(Fn ), Geom. Topol. 21 (2017), no. 5, 2851–2896.
[EF23] Mikhail Ershov and Daniel Franz, Effective finite generation for [IAn , IAn ] and the Johnson
        kernel, Groups, Geom. and Dyn. 17 (2023), no. 4, 1149–1192.
[Ge84] Stephen M. Gersten, A presentation for the special automorphism group of a free group. J. Pure
        Appl. Algebra 33 (1984), no. 3, 269–279.
[HL74] P. J. Higgins and Roger C. Lyndon, Equivalence of elements under automorphisims of a free
        group, mimeographed notes, (Queen Mary College, London, 1962), J. London Math. Soc, 8
        (1974), 254–258.
[KM97] Sava Krstić and James McCool, The non-finite presentability of IA(F3 ) and GL2 (Z[t, t−1 ]). Invent.
        Math. 129 (1997), no. 3, 595–606
84                                                      MIKHAIL ERSHOV


                                                 −1
                      Type 11R.1, ZB: l(∂F ) = (w12 R13 w12 = L−1
                                                               23 ), vI = (a, b, ∗, 0)
     (a, b, a + c, 0)                                                                                   (b, −a, a + c, 0)
                                                             w12
                                                                                            R24
                          L14
                                     (a, b, a + c, a)                    (b − a, a + c, c, a)
                                                             w12
       R13                             R13                                         L23                           L23
                                                             w12
                                       (a, b, c, a)                         (b, −a, c, a)
                        L14                                                                     R24


       (a, b, c, 0)                                                                                       (b, −a, c, 0)
                                                             w12

                                             −1
                      Type 11R.2, ZB: ∂F = (w12 R13 w12 = L−1
                                                           23 ), vI = (−b, ∗, c, 0)
                                                             w12
     (a, b, a + c, 0)                                                                                 (−b, a, a + c, 0)


                         R24                                                                      L14
                                                             w12
                                    (a, b, a + c, −b)                    (−b, a, a + c, −b)

       R13                             R13                                   R23                          R23
                                                             w12
                                      (a, b, c, −b)                        (−b, a, c, −b)
                                                                                                L14
                              R24
       (a, b, c, 0)                                                                                      (−b, a, c, 0)
                                                             w12



                                     Figure 41. The first 4 coordinates are listed

[Ma35]  Wilhelm Magnus, Über n-dimensionale Gittertransformationen. (German) Acta Math. 64 (1935),
        no. 1, 353–367.
[Mc74a] James McCool, A presentation for the automorphism group of a free group of finite rank. London
        Math. Soc, 8 (1974), 259–266.
[Mc74b] James McCool, On Nielsen’s presentation of the automorphism group of a free group. J. London
        Math. Soc. (2) 10 (1975), 265–270.
[Mc75] James McCool, Some finitely presented subgroups of the automorphism group of a free group. J.
        Algebra 35 (1975), 205–213.
[Mi23a] Daniel Minahan, The acyclicity of the complex of homologous curves preprint (2023),
        arXiv:2305.12548.
[Mi23b] Daniel Minahan, The second rational homology of the Torelli group is finitely generated. preprint
        (2023), arXiv:2307.07082.
[MP25a] Daniel Minahan and Andrew Putman, The second rational homology group of the Torelli group,
        preprint (2025), arXiv:2504.00211.
[MP25b] Daniel Minahan and Andrew Putman, Abelian covers of surfaces and the homology of the Torelli
        group, preprint (2025), arXiv:2504.00215.
[MP25c] Daniel Minahan and Andrew Putman, Presentations for representations, preprint (2025),
        arXiv:2504.00224.
[Ni21]  Jakob Nielsen, Om regning med ikke-kommutative faktorer og dens anvendelse i gruppeteorien,
        Math. Tidsskrift B (1921), 77–94.
[Ni24]  Jakob Nielsen, Die Isomorphismengruppe der freien Gruppen. (German) Math. Ann. 91 (1924),
        no. 3–4, 169–209.
[Ol91] Alexander Ol’shanskii, Geometry of defining relations in groups. Moscow, Nauka, 1989 (in Rus-
        sian); English translation in Mathematics and its Applications (Soviet Series), 70. Kluwer Aca-
        demic Publishers Group, Dordrecht, 1991.
         ON FINITE PRESENTABILITY OF SOME PARTIAL TORELLI SUBGROUPS OF Aut(Fn )                      85

[Pu23]  Andrew Putman, Partial Torelli groups and homological stability, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 23 (2023),
        3417–3496.
[Ra58] E.S. Rapaport, On free groups and their automorphisms, Acta Math. 99 (1958), 139–163.
[Re88] Burkhardt Renz, Geometrische Invarianten und Endlichkeitseigenschaften von Gruppen, Ph.D.
        thesis, Goethe Univ. Frankfurt, 1988.
[Re89] Burkhardt Renz, Geometric invariants and HNN-extensions. Group theory (Singapore, 1987),
        465–484, de Gruyter, Berlin, 1989.
[Str12] Raplh Strebel, Notes on the Sigma invariants, preprint (2012), arXiv:1204.0214.
[Wh36] J.H.C. Whitehead, On equivalent sets of elements in a free group. Ann. of Math. (2) 37 (1936),
        no. 4, 782–800.

  University of Virginia
  Email address: ershov@virginia.edu
