                                           GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIALLY
                                                  POSITIVE ELEMENTS IN FREE GROUPS


                                           EMMA DINOWITZ, LUCY KOCH-HYDE, SIOBHÁN O’CONNOR, AND ÉAMONN OLIVE
arXiv:2512.13967v1 [math.GR] 16 Dec 2025




                                                    Abstract. An word in a free group is called “potentially positive” if it is
                                                    automorphic to an element which is written with only positive exponents. We
                                                    will develop automata to analyze properties of potentially positive words. We
                                                    will use these to give new bounds on the asymptotic growth of potentially
                                                    positive elements in free groups of 2 to 7 generators. We prove the bounds for
                                                    F2 are tight, giving the growth function up to a constant multiplier. We use
                                                    the same tools to show that certain restricted automata cannot recognize the
                                                    set of potentially positive elements.




                                                                                 1. Introduction
                                              A word in a free group Fr = F (x1 , . . . , xr ) is called positive if it can be expressed
                                           as a product of the generators, x1 , . . . , xr , without inverses.
                                              Groups which can be given as a presentation with a single positive relator are
                                           called positive one-relator groups. Several results are known about this class
                                           of groups:
                                                 • It is shown in [1] that positive one-relator groups are residually solvable.
                                                   [11] strengthens this by proving that positive one-relator groups are free-
                                                   by-solvable.1
                                                 • It is shown in [20] that positive one-relator groups satisfying the C ′ (1/6)
                                                   small cancellation condition are residually finite.
                                           Unfortunately, the probability that a randomly selected word of a given length is
                                           positive vanishes exponentially as the length increases; the number of positive words
                                                                                                                                 n−1
                                           of length n is rn while the total number of words of length n is 2r (2r − 1)              .
                                              However, applying a free group automorphism to the relators of a group presen-
                                           tation produces an isomorphic group. Thus if a word is automorphic to a positive
                                           word, its associated one-relator group has properties analogous to the ones above.
                                           Such words are called potentially positive, and were first introduced in [2].
                                              This motivates our main topic of investigation:
                                           Question 1.1. How many potentially positive words are there of length n in Fr ?
                                           i.e. How does the set of potentially positive words grow?
                                              Previous work has calculated asymptotic approximations of the growth of other
                                           similar classes of words. We call words that are automorphic
                                                                                                     √ to a generator prim-
                                                                                                        n
                                           itive. [13] gives the growth of primitive words in F2 as 3 , and [12] gives the
                                           growth of primitive words in Fr as (2r − 3)n when r > 2. (These are asymp-
                                           totic approximations. We will formally define what sort of approximations these
                                             1[11] also shows that torsion-free positive one-relator groups satisfy an even stronger property.
                                           They are free-by-(Q-solvable).
                                                                                           1
2        GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


are later.) Since primitive words are also potentially positive, these form a start-
ing lower bound for the growth of potentially positive words. This also tells us
that, apart from rank 2, the potentially positive elements grow significantly faster
than the positive elements. In fact the density of the positive elements among the
potentially positive elements goes to zero as the size increases.
   The main result of this paper answers Question 1.1 for F2 . More specifically, we
prove the following theorem.
Theorem 1.2. The number of potentially positive words in F2 of length n is Θ(λn1 ),
where λ1 ≈ 2.50506841362147 is the largest root of the polynomial
(1)                            λ4 − 3λ3 + λ2 + λ − 1
   From this calculation we see that potentially positive words do exponentially
vanish in the set of all reduced words in F2 , but at a slower rate than positive
words.
   We also give novel lower bounds for the growth of potentially positive words in
Fr for 3 ≤ r ≤ 7. To our knowledge, the best lower bounds for ranks greater than 7
remain those coming from [12]. Further progress on Question 1.1 likely requires an
algorithm that recognizes potentially positive words in Fr ; our answer in F2 relies
on one for F2 first provided by Goldstein in [5], and improved in [9]. It is not known
whether such an algorithm exists for r > 2, thus we ask:
Question 1.3. How complicated is it to decide whether a word is potentially posi-
tive?
   In particular, we would like to determine what sorts of automata can recognize
potential positivity. The existing algorithms show that for rank two anything at
least as powerful as a Turing machine can decide it. In fact [9] provides an algorithm
which uses worst-case linear memory and so the rank two case can be decided with
a linear bounded automaton.
   In this paper we will approach the question in the opposite direction. We will
show that certain models of computation (including finite state machines and push
down automata) are insufficient for deciding Fr for r ≥ 2.

                                  2. Background
2.1. Growth and density. This paper deals heavily with the growth of sets of
words.
Definition 2.1. Let S be a set of words on a finite alphabet Σ. We define the
growth function gn (S) to be the number of the words in S with length n.
  We will define several asymptotic ways to consider growth for these functions.
The finest notion of growth we will use is asymptotic equivalence.
Definition 2.2. We say two functions f, g : N → N are asymptotically equiva-
lent, written f ∼ g, when
                                     f (n)
                                lim         =1
                               n→∞ g(n)

    Coarser notions of growth will be useful.
Definition 2.3. We will have the following classes of N → N functions:
     • O(g) = {f | ∃C, m : ∀n ≥ m : Cg(n) > f (n)}
         GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                        3


      • Ω(g) = {f | g ∈ O(f )}
      • Θ(g) = Ω(g) ∩ O(g)

   These create a partial order, being analogous to ≤, ≥, and =, respectively. The
most well known of these notions is certainly the first, called “big-O”, which is
commonly used in algorithmic analysis. We will make use of each of them. We will
also make sparing use of the classes analogous to < and >:
      • o(g) = O(g) \ Θ(g)
      • ω(g) = Ω(g) \ Θ(g)

Definition 2.4. A set B ⊆ A ⊆ Σ∗ has a density function defined as

                                          gn (B) + 1
                                   n 7→
                                          gn (A) + 1

Definition 2.5. A set B ⊆ A is negligible in A when the limit of the density is
0. Alternatively B is generic in A when the limit of the density is 1.

  A stronger condition will also be useful.

Definition 2.6. A set B ⊆ A with density function d is exponentially negligible
in A when d(n) ∈ O (C −n ) for some constant C > 1. Likewise B is exponentially
generic when its relative complement, A \ B, is exponentially negligible.

2.2. Free groups. In order to increase the visual contrast between letters we will
generally write the generators of a free group using colored shapes ( , , , and ).
We will represent the inverse of a generator with the outline of the corresponding
shape ( , , , and respectively).
    We will represent automorphisms by showing the action only on the affected
generators. For example, in F ( , ) we use 7→            to indicate the automorphism
which performs that mapping and behaves as the identity on .
    We say a word is cyclically reduced if its first and last letters are not each
other’s inverses. Similarly, we can find a word’s cyclic reduction by deleting its
first and last letter until it is cyclically reduced. Since cyclic reduction is always a
conjugation, the cyclic reduction of a word is always in the same automorphic orbit
as the word.
    We will see in the following results that finding the growth rate of the cyclically
reduced words is often sufficient for determining the growth rate of all words. In
fact, if a set of words grows faster than the conjugacy class of one of the words,
then the growth of the cyclically reduced words is the same as that of the whole set.
We will see this in Corollary 2.8, but first we need the following technical lemma.

Lemma 2.7. Let us have two functions f and g, and some b > a > 1 such that
f (n) ∈ O(an ) and g(n) ∈ Ω(bn ). Roughly speaking, the exponential
                                                              Px part of g has a
greater base than the exponetial part of f . The function x 7→ i=0 f (i)g(x − i) is
in Θ(g).

Proof. The lower bound is trivial, so we will proceed to the upper bound.
4        GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


    Observe the following.
                          x
                                            !        x
                                                                       !
                          X                          X f (i)g(x)
(1)                  O          f (i)g(x − i)   ⊆O
                          i=0                         i=1
                                                              bi
                                                            x
                                                                       !
                                                            X ai
(2)                                             ⊆ O g(x)
                                                            i=1
                                                                  bi
                                                             ∞
                                                                       !
                                                            Xai
                                                ⊆ O g(x)
                                                         i=1
                                                             bi
(3)                                             = O (g)


(1) holds because g(n) ∈ Ω(bn ) implies bg(x−1) ≤ g(x) and thus g(x−i) ≤ b−1 g(x).
(2) holds because f (n) ∈ O(an ). (3) holds because b > a and thus the series
converges to (1 − b/a)−1 , a constant.                                          □

Corollary 2.8. Let S be a subset of Fr that contains only cyclically reduced words.
Let S̄ be the set of words whose
                              cyclic reductions
                                            √ are in S. If the growth of words
of length ℓ in S is g ∈ Ω bℓ for some b > 2r − 1, then the growth of words of
length ℓ in S̄ is Θ(g).
Proof. Let us consider words in S̄ of length ℓ and cyclically reduced length ℓ′ . These
words are of the form vwv −1 where w is in S and there is no cancellation between
v and w or between w and v −1 . It follows that |w| = ℓ′ and |v| = (ℓ − ℓ′ )/2.
From our hypothesis, the growth of words of length ℓ′ in S is some function g. v
can be any word of length (ℓ − ℓ′ )/2 so long as its last letter does not cancel with
the first letter of w or that of w−1 . The growth of such words is some function
                             ′            √        ℓ−ℓ′
f (ℓ − ℓ′ ) ∈ Θ (2r − 1)(ℓ−ℓ )/2 = Θ        2r − 1      . Thus the growth of words of
this form is g(ℓ′ )f (ℓ − ℓ′ ). The set of all words in S̄ of length ℓ is then the sum for
every ℓ′ between 0 and ℓ. Thus by Lemma 2.7 this is Θ(g).                               □

   This corollary will be applicable to all of the sets addressed in the paper. We are
lucky enough that our growth is always significantly higher than that of a conjugacy
class. However, an analogous argument can be applied to show the following as well.
Corollary 2.9. Let S be a subset of Fr that contains only cyclically reduced words.
Let S̄ be the set of words whose
                                cyclic reductions
                                              √ are in S. If the growth of words
of length ℓ in S isg ∈ O bℓ for some b < 2r − 1, then the growth of words of
                     √       ℓ
length ℓ in S̄ is Θ    2r − 1 .

   Cyclically reduced primitive
                      √         words in F2 grow as a polynomial, and so the total
set grows at a rate of 3, the same rate as a conjugacy class.

2.3. Potential positivity. We will need a few facts about potential positivity,
especially in F2 . First, we present a basic but very useful fact about potential
positivity in free groups of any rank.
Proposition 2.10. Suppose a word w in Fr = F (x1 , . . . , xr ), r ≥ 2, has r − 1
generators that only occur with positive exponents. Then w is potentially positive.
         GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                                5


Proof. Suppose without loss of generality that every generator except xr only occurs
with positive exponents. Then every syllable of xm       r where m is negative occurs
after a syllable of another generator to a positive power. Let k be the largest
negative exponent in absolute value that appears on xr in w. Since x1 , . . . , xr−1
only appear with positive exponents, applying the automorphism xi 7→ xi x−k    r  for
each i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , r − 1} sends w to a positive word.                         □
   We will make extensive use of the following theorem of Goldstein [5] (for an
alternate proof, see [9]).
Theorem 2.11 (Goldstein’s Criterion). Let w be cyclically reduced and potentially
positive. If we consider w as a cyclic word, there exists x, y ∈ { , , , } such that
every occurrence of x is preceded and followed by y.
  We will also take the following related technical lemma from [9].
Lemma 2.12. If w ∈ F2 is potentially positive and satisfies Goldstein’s Criterion
with x = and y = , applying 7→          to w sends it to a word satisfying Goldstein’s
Criterion either with x = and y = or with x = and y = . By symmetry, if
w is potentially positive and satisfies Goldstein’s Criterion with x = and y = ,
applying 7→      to w sends it to a word satisfying Goldstein’s Criterion either with
x = and y = or with x = and y = .
   Finally, for brevity, we will use the shorthand PPr to represent the set of
cyclically-reduced potentially positive words in in Fr .

                            3. Automata and matrices
3.1. Automata and matrices. Our method for creating lower bounds will be to
provide automata which generate potentially positive words (i.e. regular languages
of potentially positive words) and calculate their growth from the automaton. We
will consider an automaton A to be a directed graph whose nodes are labeled with
letters in the free group (that is the generators and their inverses). We will call this
labeling function ηA . ηA induces a mapping from paths in the digraph to words in
the free group. A path here is defined to be a sequence (finite unless specified) of
nodes such that for any two consecutive nodes x and y, there is an edge from x to
y. Considering the path as a sequence of nodes, we get a word by applying ηA to
each node in the sequence.
   For this reason we will call an automaton reduced when no edge of the digraph
connects a node to an inversely labeled node. If an automaton is reduced then the
image of any path is a reduced word.
   We will in particular be interested in closed paths and their images. We say a
path from a node x to a node y is closed if there exists an edge from y to x. We will
consider the empty path, that is the path with no nodes, to be closed by vacuity.
Closed paths in reduced automata must then lift to cyclically reduced words, since
we require that there exists an edge between the last and first letters.
   We will also define a mixing2 automaton.
Definition 3.1. We say a digraph (or by extension an automaton) is mixing if
there exists some N such that for every ordered pair of nodes x and y, and for every
n ≥ N , there exists a path from x to y of length n.
  2We borrow this terminology from symbolic dynamics. See [10, Def. 4.5.9] for a comparison.
6        GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


   These automata will be useful to us because of the following theorem which
allows us to count closed paths:
Lemma 3.2. Let G be a mixing sofic shift whose adjacency matrix has largest
eigenvalue λ. The number of closed paths of length n in G is Θ(λn )
Proof. An irreducible sofic shift has a right resolving presentation G = (G′ , L)
([10, Thm. 3.3.11]) and for a right resolving graph the number of paths |Ln | of
length n satisfies k1 |Ln (G′ )| ≤ |Ln (G)| ≤ |Ln (G′ )| ([10, Thm. 4.1.13]), where k is
the number of states in G′ . An irreducible graph has Cλn ≤ |Ln | ≤ C ′ λn . The
number of closed paths Pn of length n has |Pn | ≤ |Ln | ≤ C ′ λn . Since G is mixing
there is an N so that every pair of nodes v, v ′ has a path from v to v ′ of length N .
Therefore there is an embedding of Ln into Pn+2N,w (the closed paths about the
node w) by adding a path of length N from w to the word and a path of length
N from the word to w. Therefore Cλ−2N λn ≤ |Ln−2N | ≤ |Pn,w | ≤ |Pn | for all
n ≥ 2N .                                                                              □
   In practice nearly everything discussed here will be mixing, however for com-
pleteness we can give the following corollary:
Corollary 3.3. Let G be the sum of finitely many mixing digraphs. The number
of closed paths of length n in G is Θ(λn ), where λ is the largest eigenvalue of the
adjacency matrix of G.
Proof. The adjacency matrix of the sum of digraphs is a block matrix with blocks
consisting of each component of the sum. λ is then the maximum eigenvalue of the
blocks. It follows then that if G has k components the number of closed paths is
O(kλn ) = O(λn ).
   Since there is also a component which has largest eigenvalue λ, the paths in that
block grow Θ(λn ). Thus the number of closed paths in G is Ω(λn ).                □
   Our strategy then is to use Corollary 3.3 to calculate the number of closed paths
in the digraph. If our labeling map is one-to-one, then this gives us the Θ-class for
the set of (cyclically reduced) words produced by the machine. However, injectivity
is going to be too strong of a requirement for what we want to do.
Definition 3.4. The node labeling of an automaton is one-to-constant if there
exists a constant c such that for any cyclically reduced word w there are at most c
closed paths whose image is w.
   To make it easier to determine if an automaton’s labeling is one-to-constant we
will give the following helpful lemma:
Lemma 3.5. The node labeling of a mixing automaton is one-to-constant iff no
distinct paths have the same start-point, end-point, and image.
Proof. Suppose we have two distinct paths, p0 and p1 , from x to y with ηA (p0 ) =
ηA (p1 ). Now let us have an arbitrary path q from y to x. Since the automaton is
mixing q must exist. Let p0 ◦ q denote the path formed by following p0 and then q.
We have that ηA (p0 ◦ q) = ηA (p1 ◦ q). Let us say w = ηA (p0 ◦ q). Since there are at
least two ways to get from x to itself with an image of w there are at least 2n ways
to get from x to itself with an image of wn . Since the length wn grows linearly on
n and 2n grows exponentially on n, there is no polynomial bound on the number
of duplicate words produced, let alone a constant bound.
         GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                      7


   Now let us suppose that no such pair of paths exist. For an arbitrary pair of
closed paths which map to the same word, we can show they must be completely
disjoint. If they were not disjoint they would share some node x. Then we could
construct distinct paths from x to itself which map to the same word by following
our two closed paths starting from x. Since any collection of duplicate words must
be induced by a set of pairwise disjoint closed paths, the total number of duplicate
words is bounded above by the number of nodes, a constant.                        □

  The following:
Lemma 3.6. Let A be a mixing automaton whose labeling is one-to-constant. Let
p(n) be the number of closed paths of length n in A. Let w(n) be the number of
cyclic words of length n produced by A. w ∈ Θ(p).
                                                                     1
Proof. Since the labeling is one-to-constant and preserves length,     p(n) ≤ w(n) ≤
                                                                     c
p(n). Therefore w ∈ Θ(p).                                                          □

   From here we have everything that is needed to prove our lower bounds. We
will give several machines, demonstrate they are reduced, mixing, one-to-constant
and produce only potentially positive words. Their eigenvalues then give us lower
bounds.
   However, we think that this would be a be a bit mystical. Our techniques for
producing the automaton may be useful. It is possible for a fixed automaton A and
automorphism φ to construct an automaton which produces exactly the images of
the words produced by A under φ. Our strategy is then to start from the automaton
which produces the positive words and apply automorphisms to increase the largest
eigenvalue. The automata we produce are all the result of limiting an infinite family
of automorphisms.

                                4. Lower bounds



     Figure 4.1. A machine which only produces potentially positive words




4.1. Rank 2.
Theorem 4.2. All words generated by the machine in Figure 4.1 are potentially
positive. Furthermore, the growth of paths of length n through this machine is Θ(λn1 )
where λ1 ≈ 2.50506841362147 is the largest root of the polynomial
                         (1 − λ) λ4 − 3λ3 + λ2 + λ − 1 .
                                                          
8       GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


Proof. Fix a word w produced by the machine. Consider the effect of 7→        on w.
All the syllables in w are flanked by on both sides, so 7→       decreases each of
their lengths by 1. Since each is preceded by n , any it introduces cancels with
one of the s and the introduces a new to replace the one that was canceled.
Thus the resulting word is still generated by the machine and has strictly fewer
 s (unless it had none to begin with). By induction, repeated application of this
automorphism eventually results in a word with no s. Since all words in F2 which
have only positive exponents on one of the generators are potentially positive, this
word is potentially positive.
   The machine has two nodes labeled with , however we can be sure there are no
duplicate paths since one has only incoming edges from itself and and the other
has only incoming from itself and .
   The characteristic polynomial of the transition matrix for the machine in Fig-
ure 4.1 is
                          (1 − λ) λ4 − 3λ3 + λ2 + λ − 1 .
                                                       

This has largest root λ1 ≈ 2.50506841362147, and thus the growth of paths of
length n is Θ(λn1 ).                                                      □




      Figure 4.3. This machine only produces potentially positive words.

4.2. Rank 3 through 7. To get lower bounds in higher ranks we will provide a
general strategy. For this it might help to refer to the machines in Figures 4.3 and
4.4.
   Looking specifically at Figure 4.4, the strategy to take words produced by this
to positive words is to send out in both directions from , then send out in
        GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                      9




                                                              ±




        Figure 4.4. The machine only producing potentially positive
        words described in (2) for rank 4. In that machine the nodes
        labeled and have the exact same incoming and outgoing edges,
        except in that they each have a self-loop but no edge to the other.
        To reduce clutter, we have combined these two nodes with nearly
        identical behavior into a single node. This node is labeled ± ,
        and indicates that when following an incoming arrow to that node
        from another one, the machine can produce either or . However,
        when following an in arrow from ± to itself, the machine cannot
        switch the sign. When calculating the eigenvalue one can use the
        original matrix or the above if the edges directed to the ± labeled
        node (other than the self-loop) are weighted with a 2 (representing
        the two possibilities).



both directions from . The circular portions of the machine on the left and right
insulate the s and s until the s and s in the middle are eliminated. This works
because everything that can point to the nodes on the right eventually “becomes”
a when we send out in both directions from . At the end we can use the s to
eliminate the remaining appearances of and the s to eliminate the remaining s.
Then we can use Proposition 2.10 to finish. In higher ranks we iterate this strategy.
We will give the general description in more detail below.
10       GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


   We first present the general adjacency matrix of our automaton for Fr as a block
matrix below. Here U is a matrix with all entries above the diagonal equal to 1
and all entries below and on the diagonal equal to 0. L is U ⊺ , and I is the identity
matrix. All of these blocks are square (r − 2) × (r − 2) matrices.
   We will also name and label each node. We name the nodes with Greek letters
corresponding to the row of the block array and with a subscript equal to the
subscript of the label (e.g. there is no ε1 node because there is no node labeled x−1
                                                                                   1
in the ε row of the block matrix).
   It is helpful to note that in all cases a U between two sets of nodes means that
there is a transition between nodes where the source has a strictly higher index
than the destination. L has the opposite meaning, with the source having a strictly
lower index than the destination.

            α1    {x
                  1
                                1 1     1   1    0       1     0   0   1
                  
                     x       2                                         
             βi             ..                                          
                             . 1  1     1   1   U +L    U      0   0   U
                                
                                                                        
                    xr−1 
                                                                       
                                                                         
            γr    {x             1 1     1   0    1       0     0   0   0
                                                                        
                   r−1 
            δr     x             1 1     0   1    1       0     0   0   0
                                                                        
                   r −1       
                     x
                                                                         
                   2 
                                                                       
                          .. 1
                                                                         
             εi            .      L     0   0   L+I      0     0   0   0
                                                                         
                   −1 
                                                                        
                  xr−1
                                                                        
                       −1 
                                                                        
                    x
                   2 
                                                                         
                           .. 1 U + L
                                                                         
             ζi                          1   1    L     U +I    0   0   U
                                                                         
(2)                         . 
                   −1 
                                                                        
                  xr−1 
                                                                        
                                                                         
                   x2 
                                                                       
                                                                         
             ηi          ..     1 L     0   0    L       0     I   0   0
                                                                         
                         .                                            
                    x
                                                                       
                   r−1−1 
                                                                        
                  
                    x 1        
                                                                         
                                                                         
             θi         ..                                              
                         . 0      0     0   0    0       0     I   0   0
                   −1 
                                                                        
                  xr−2 
                                                                        
                                                                         
                   x2 
                                                                        
                                                                        
             ιi        ..      0 0     0   0    0       0     0   I
                                                                         
                                                                        I
                       .
                    xr−1
                  


Theorem 4.5. All words produced by (2) are potentially positive.
Proof. Let us have a word w produced by the machine in (2). We will explicitly
construct a sequence of automorphisms which brings w to a positive word. To begin
we will apply the automorphism x1 7→ xn2 2 x1 xn2 2 where n2 is one more than the
exponent on the largest x−1
                         2 syllable, i.e. the length of the longest run of consecutive
x−1
 2  s. Three  nodes in the machine are labeled with x−1   2 . Note that two of these,
ε2 and ζ2 , must always occur in a syllable adjacent to a x1 . Specifically ε2 must
always come after a x1 and ζ2 must always come before an x1 . Thus applying the
automorphism x1 7→ xn2 2 x1 xn2 2 replaces all syllables generated by ε2 and ζ2 with
         GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                         11


positive x2 syllables. Note further that the only place x−1    1 can occur is in substrings
of the form x1 xi2 x−1
                    1  x j
                           x
                         2 1 (for positive i and j). Thus     the x−n
                                                                   2
                                                                     2
                                                                       syllables introduced
        −1
from x1 syllables by applying this automorphism are immediately canceled.
   Next we apply x2 7→ xn3 3 x2 xn3 3 where n3 is one more than the exponent on the
largest x−1                                         −1
          3 syllable. This eliminates all the x3 syllables produced by ε3 and ζ3 .
              −1
Note that x2 syllables produced by θi may appear in various substrings in the
initial word w, but after applying x1 7→ xn2 2 x1 xn2 2 , they always appear in substrings
                          j
of the form x2 xi3 x−1                         −1
                     2 x3 x2 . Thus no new x3 syllables are introduced by applying
this second automorphism.
   We continue this process by having each generator up to xr−2 produce the follow-
ing generator in both directions, until we have eliminated all syllables originating
from εi and ζi .
   At this point every negative syllable is either:
     (1) appearing in a subword of the form xr−1 x−1        i xr−1 for i < r − 1. (These
         originate from θi )
     (2) a x−1
            r syllable. (These originate from δi )
We will handle (1) first. Note that at this point all xr−1 syllables are positive.
We start by applying the automorphism xr−1 7→ xr−1 xr−2 . This eliminates all
the remaining negative xr−2 syllables since they are all adjacent to a xr−1 . Now
every syllable previously covered by (1) is adjacent to a xr−2 , so we perform the
automorphism xr−2 7→ xr−2 xr−3 and continue in this descending pattern until we
apply x2 7→ x2 x1 , eliminating the final negative syllable of type (1).
   Now the only negative syllables remaining are of the form x−k        r , so by Proposi-
tion 2.10 we are done.
                                                                                          □

                                   5. Upper bound
  We want to produce an upper bound for the growth rate of potentially positive
words in F2 , so we will begin by using a necessary condition for potential positivity.


         Figure 5.1. A machine which produces exactly those words
         words which satisfy Goldstein’s Criterion with y = and x =




   The machine in Figure 5.1 produces all words which satisfy Goldstein’s Criterion
for a particular choice of x and y. It is easy to see that the growth rate of all
words which satisfy Goldstein’s Criterion has the same growth rate, since there
are 8 meaningful x, y combinations and each combination gives a relabeling of the
machine in Figure 5.1.
   Thus we have the following:
Lemma 5.2. The growth of PP2 is Ω(λn1 ), where λ1 ≈ 2.53209, is the largest root
of the polynomial:
(3)                                   λ3 − 3λ2 + 3
12       GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


Proof. From Figure 5.1 we get the following transition matrix:
                                             
                                  1 1 0 0
                                 1 1 1 0
(4)                              
                                 0 1 1 1
                                              

                                  0 0 1 0
We can calculate the characteristic polynomial of (4) to be
                                 λ λ3 − 3λ2 + 3
                                                

   Since each node has a unique label, the function assigning paths to words is
certainly injective. Thus the growth rate of the machine in Figure 5.1 is the largest
root of (3). By Theorem 2.11, every potentially positive word is generated by this
machine, so the growth rate of potentially positive words is Ω(λn1 ).              □

   We will use the notation γ to mean the automorphism ↔ . We have seen
that the number of potentially positive words is bounded above by the number
of words that satisfies Goldstein’s Criterion. We can bring this bound down by
considering words which satisfy Goldstein’s Criterion, and still satisfy it after ap-
plying an automorphism. By Lemma 2.12, if a potentially positive word satisfies
the criterion with a certain x and y, after applying a certain automorphism it must
either satisfy the criterion with the same x and y or with γ(x) and γ(y). We can
then split the set of potentially positive words satisfying Goldstein’s Criterion after
applying the automorphism from Lemma 2.12 into two sets; one corresponding to
x and y, the other to γ(x) and γ(y). The Θ-class of words satisfying the criterion
after the automorphism is then the Θ-class of the larger of these two sets, so we can
consider them separately. Furthermore, if we apply the automorphism specified by
Lemma 2.12 again, each of these two sets can be split into two more cases in the
same manner. Iterating this process gives an infinite binary tree (Figure 5.4). Each
layer of the tree consists of all the ways a word can satisfy Goldstein’s Criterion
over the course of a fixed number of iterations of this process. The fastest growing
set in each layer gives an upper bound on the number of potentially positive words
in F2 . We formalize this idea with the following definition.
Definition 5.3. Let us define G to be the set of words satisfying Goldstein’s
Criterion with x = and y = . Let φ be the automorphism 7→        described in
Lemma 2.12 and let γ be the automorphism ↔ as before. Recursively:
                         R(S) = {w : w ∈ G, φ(w) ∈ S}
                         L(S) = {w : w ∈ G, γ(φ(w)) ∈ S}
We will employ a convenient shorthand wherein we leave the parentheses and a
final G as implicit. Thus, e.g. we will write L2 R to mean L2 (R(G)).
   Our proof of Theorem 1.2 relies on the following three facts about the tree in
Figure 5.4.
Proposition 5.5. For every set S in the tree, g(SL), g(SR) ∈ O (g(S)). In other
words, the growth rate of the children of S is at most that of S.
  We will call the set of words generated by the machine in Figure 4.1 R∞ , a
notation which will make sense in light of the following proposition:
        GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                     13


                                          G




                            L                         R




                      L2          LR           RL            R2




                 L3    L2 R LRL LR2 RL2 RLR R2 L                  R3

             Figure 5.4. The first four layers of sets drawn as a tree

Proposition 5.6.
                                   ∞
                                   \
                                         Rn = R∞
                                   n=0

Proposition 5.7. For all n ∈ N,
                                g(Rn L) ∈ o(g(R∞ ))
  Taking these propositions as given for now, we can prove our main result:
Proof of Theorem 1.2. Let us call the set of words produced by the nth layer of the
tree Yn . These can be thought of as all words which do not reach a non-positive
word after n steps of Goldstein’s algorithm.
    We can see that g(Yn ) gives successive upper bounds on the growth of PP2 which
get tighter as n approaches infinity. We will show that g(Yn ) ∼ g(Rn ), and so the
pointwise limit of g(Rn ) as n approaches infinity is an upper bound.
    Since Rn L grows strictly slower than R∞ (Proposition 5.7), by induction, all
sets in the tree which include any L in their name must have strictly slower growth
than R∞ . Since R∞ is a subset of Rn it must grow slower (g(Rn ) ∈ Ω(g(R∞ ))),
and so for any node in the tree S containing an L, g(S) ∈ o(g(Rn )). Since Yn is
the union of Rn with other sets in the tree containing L, g(Yn ) ∼ g(Rn ).
    Since g(Rn ) converges to at most g(R∞ ), this means our upper bounds converge
to O(gk (R∞ )) = O(λk1 ). From Theorem 4.2 we have that gk (PP2 ) ∈ Ω(λk1 ) and so
gk (PP2 ) ∈ Θ(λk1 ).                                                             □
   All that remains is to prove the propositions. The proof of Proposition 5.5 is the
shortest.
Proof of Proposition 5.5. We will prove only that g(SL) ∈ O(g(S)). The other case
follows in the same manner. We proceed by induction over all paths in the tree. By
Definition 5.3, we have that L ⊆ G. Let Z0 and Z1 be sets such that Z0 ⊆ Z1 . It
follows then that R(Z0 ) ⊆ R(Z1 ) and likewise L(Z0 ) ⊆ L(Z1 ). Then by induction
SL ⊆ S and therefore g(SL) ∈ O(g(S)).                                            □
14      GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


   Now we will give descriptions of the languages Rn and Rn L in terms of forbidden
subwords (called “forbidden blocks” in [10]). This description will be useful for
proving the other two propositions.
Lemma 5.8. The set Rn is all reduced words that do not contain the following
subwords:
     •
     •
     • all k where 0 ≤ k ≤ n
Proof. First we will show none of these subwords may appear. It follows from
Goldstein’s Criterion that , , and     cannot appear. The set Rn can be given
as:
(5)                   Rn = {w | w ∈ G, ( 7→      n
                                                     ) (w) ∈ G}
Suppose w ∈ Rn contains a subword k . Its image under 7→ n must contain
   k−n
        , since the right produces −n on its left and neither can cancel under an
automorphism which only introduces new and letters. If k < n, this image then
contains      which is forbidden in G. If k = n, this image then contains   which is
also forbidden in G. Therefore k must be larger than n.
    Suppose w is a cyclic word not containing , , or . Then can only appear
next to in w, so w ∈ G = R0 . We will proceed by induction on n. Suppose w
does not contain , , or k for any 0 ≤ k ≤ n. We will show that if φ is the
automorphism 7→ , φ(w) does not contain , , or k for any 0 ≤ k ≤ n − 1.
Suppose by way of contradiction that it does contain one of these types of subword.
If φ(w) contains , φ must have added an that did not cancel, so w must have had
a subword of the form        or , contradicting our assumption. Similarly, if φ(w)
contains , either the was already there in w or it was added by φ. Therefore
w either contained a subword of the form        or , contradicting our assumption.
Finally, if φ(w) contains a subword of the form k for 0 ≤ k ≤ n − 1, w must have
contained a subword of the form k+1 , again contradicting our assumption. □
Lemma 5.9. The set Rn L is all reduced words in Rn which do not contain any
subwords of the form k where k > n + 2.
Proof. Let φ be the automorphism 7→ . First, let us note that the set Rn L can
be given as
                Rn L = {w | w ∈ G, φn (w) ∈ L}
                      = {w | w ∈ G, φn (w) ∈ G, γ(φn+1 (w)) ∈ G}.
This shows immediately that if w is not in Rn then it is not in Rn L.
   Next, suppose w contains a subword of the form k for some k > n + 2. Let
ψ be the automorphism γ ◦ φn+1 . Then ψ( k ) contains k−n−1 as a subword.
Since k > n + 2, the exponent on in the image of the subword must be at least
two, which means that ψ(w) contains     as a subword and so is not in G. Therefore
if w contains a subword of the form k , it is not in Rn L.
   Suppose, on the other hand, that w ∈ Rn and w does not contain a subword of
the form k where k > n + 2. To show that w is in Rn L, all we need to do is
show that γ(φn+1 (w)) ∈ G. This is equivalent to showing that , , and           do
not appear as subwords in φn+1 (w). Any occurrence of in φn+1 (w) must have
already been in w. Indeed, any new must be produced from an , however each
         GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                      15


  must be adjacent on both sides to syllables, and by Lemma 5.8 the exponent
on these syllables must be greater than n. Since w ∈ G, it cannot contain m or
  m
      as subwords, and so any occurrence of in w must be in a subword of the
form k for k > 0. Thus, so long as k ≤ n + 2 for any such subwords of w,
cannot be a subword of φn+1 (w), and so w is in Rn L.                       □
Proof of Proposition 5.6. It follows from Lemma 5.8 that the union of all Rn are
the words not containing , , or k for any k ≥ 0.
   It is clear from Figure 4.1 that none of these subwords can appear in R∞ .
   Suppose w does not contain , , or k for any k ≥ 0. We will show that
the machine in Figure 4.1 produces w. From our assumptions it follows that every
  in w is preceded and followed by and that cannot appear before or after .
Finally, a that occurs after an cannot be followed by an . Thus we see that
indeed w is a path in the machine.                                            □
Proof of Proposition 5.7. Let us consider the cyclic words in Rn L. We will define
a function f which takes a generic subset of Rn L and assigns each word to a word
of equal length in R∞ . This will show that gk (Rn L) ∈ O (gk (R∞ )), because such
an encoding would show that the chosen subset grows as R∞ and the remainder is
negligible and so does not effect the asymptotic growth.
   There are two differences between the machines Rn L and R∞ :
      • Rn L forbids all subwords of the form n+2+k where k is a positive integer,
        while R∞ does not.
      • R∞ forbids all subwords of the form n+k where k is a positive integer,
        while Rn L does not.
All other subwords (not containing any of the above subwords) are either illegal in
both machines, or legal in both machines.
   Our function f will then replace segments of the form:
                            k0    n+k1     n+k2           n+ks−1    ks
                                                   ...
where s ≥ 2 and k0 , . . . , ks are positive integers, with the following:
                        k0 −1    n+k1 +2    n+k2           n+ks−1    ks −1
                                                    ...
We present some observations.
      • The segments we are replacing are legal in Rn L but illegal in R∞ .
      • It is impossible for segments of the first form to overlap, and thus there is
         no ambiguity with the replacement scheme.
      • So long as a word in Rn L contains , all its subwords that are illegal in R∞
         must be of this form.
      • The image after replacement in f is a string which is legal in R∞ , but illegal
         in Rn L.
      • The segment and its image have the same length.
If we consider the subset of words in Rn L which do not contain , we can see
that they must also not contain , and thus they can grow at most O 2ℓ . This
makes them negligible in the total set Rn L, which certainly grows faster than that.
Therefore, if we let Rn L′ be the set of words which are in Rn L and contain , we
have that the growth of Rn L′ is asymptotically equivalent to Rn L.
   The function f : Rn L′ → R∞ is an injective function which maintains the length
of the input. Thus we have
16        GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY




                          g (Rn L) ∼ g (Rn L′ ) ∈ O(g (R∞ ))
                                       n n+3
   Furthermore the subword v =                  cannot appear in the image of any
       n ′
w ∈ R L under f . This is because v is illegal in Rn L, but cannot appear as the
subword of a substituted segment since the first syllable of such a segment always
has exponent > n + 2, and each other syllable must be preceded by         (while this
is preceded by ).
   Since R∞ is a language produced by a irreducible mixing automaton, it is
“growth sensitive” (see [3]) and thus excluding any subword gives an exponentially
negligible subset. Thus gk (Rn L′ ) ∈ O(εk gk (R∞ )) for some ε < 1, and so
                          g (Rn L) ∼ g (Rn L′ ) ∈ o(g (R∞ ))
     and we are done.                                                                □
   That gives us the weaker claim in Theorem 1.2, now we will prove the slightly
stronger version. A strengthening of Proposition 5.7 will be as follows:
Lemma 5.10. R∞ is not negligible in PP2
                                                                        S∞
Proof. More precisely, we will be showing that R∞ is not negligible in n=0 Rn L.
This is sufficient since Rn L ⊋ PP2 . As we did in the proof of Proposition 5.7, we
will discard all words which do not contain a , since, by the same reasoning, these
words are negligible in the total.                   S∞
   Our strategy will be to provide an injection f : ( n=0 Rn L′ \ R∞ ) ↣ R∞ which
increases the length by at most a constant bound. More formally there exists a
constant c such that for every w in the domain, |w| + c ≥ |f (w)|. This is sufficient
because R∞ grows exponentially, i.e. gn (R∞ ) ∈ Θ(λk ). Thus
                          gk+c (R∞ ) ∼ λc gk (R∞ ) ∈ Θ(λk )
To define f consider some word w in the domain. w belongs to Rn L for some n.
If w belongs to multiple Rn L, let us take n to be the largest value possible. With
the selected n, the subwords forbidden in R∞ are of the form
                          k0    n+k1   n+k2          n+ks−1     ks
                                              ...
where s ≥ 2 and each ki is positive. We will selected one of these subwords arbi-
trarily to be the “signal segment”. All other of these forbidden subwords we will
replace with:
                         k0 −1 n+k1 +2 k2
                                           . . . ks−1 ks −1
This type of replacement cannot increase the length of the word. For the signal
segment we will replace it with the form:
                        k0 −1    n+3    k1    k2         ks−1   ks −1
                                                   ...
This type of replacement can increase the length, but by at most 4 (this happens
when s = 2).
   In order to show that this is an injection we will provide a way to recover the word
w from the image. We first can use the signal to recover the n used in the encoding.
We find all subwords of the form i          m+3
                                                  for non-negative i and m. One such
subword must be from the encoded signal, and none can come from other encoded
forbidden words as all of those would require the first syllable to have a exponent
of at least 3. It is possible for there to be multiple subwords, but other than the
         GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                     17


signal must have been present in the initial word, so our signal is the one with the
largest exponent. Once we have recovered n is is trivial to reverse the encoding on
the signal segment, but we can also determine the locations of all the non-signal
segments and reverse their encodings as well. Each encoded subword must contain
a word of the form n+k+2 for positive k, and such segments are forbidden in
Rn L, so they cannot appear elsewhere. Thus we can reverse the encoding and f is
injective.
   Since the only replacement which can increase the length is the signal encoding
which happens exactly once, the total increase in length is at most 6.            □
    The natural extension to this question is whether R∞ is generic in PP2 . In
the encoding we have provided there is a choice as to which segment is the signal.
This indicates that there may be a degree of wiggle room, suggesting R∞ could
be generic. However, the cases in where there is a choice requires multiple of the
forbidden segments, which turns our to be quite rare. In fact, counter to this initial
intuition, computer simulations suggest that R∞ is not generic, with a fixed density
at very roughly 1/5. (Uniform sampling of potentially positive words is difficult
especially for larger words. for this we sampled approximately 100 words of length
about 300)
    For now we offer no proof in either direction, but we will offer evidence that R∞
is the correct set to consider for this question.
Theorem 5.11. If there is a finite strongly connected automaton which produces
a generic subset of PP2 , R∞ produces a generic subset of PP2 .
Proof. Let A be strongly connected automaton which produces a generic subset of
PP2 . Assume by way of contradiction that R∞ is not generic in PP2 , and so by
Lemma 5.10 the density of R∞ converges to some constant value between 0 and 1.
   A cannot completely contain R∞ , since by [3, Main result] A would grow faster
than R∞ . Since R∞ grows like PP2 by Lemma 5.10, this would imply that A grows
faster than the set in which in which it supposedly is contained.
   Now let us consider the intersection P = A ∩ R∞ . Since R∞ is non-negligible
and A is generic, P is a generic proper subset of R∞ . However, the intersection
of two sets produced strongly connected automata is also produced by a strongly
connected automaton, so by [3, Main result] the intersection cannot be generic in
R∞ .                                                                           □

          6. An automaton for the potentially positive words
   In our proof of Theorem 5.11, we provide an argument which can show that there
is no finite strongly connected automaton which produces exactly the potentially
positive words.
   In light of this we if we can produce PP2 using a more general type of automaton.
Most directly we might lift the requirement that words are produced by closed loops
allowing specified start and end states and considering the images of all paths from
a start state to an end state. (Our closed loop requirement can be translated to
such an automaton by creating one copy of the automaton for each node and a
node in each copy as the start and end state.) Such an automaton is called a “finite
state machine” (FSM) and a language produced by an FSM is called “regular”.
Question 6.1. Is PPr a regular language for any r ≥ 2?
18          GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


    For those whose background is mainly in dynamics, this is equivalent to asking
if the shift of potentially positive words is sofic.
    If the answer to these questions were “Yes”, it would mean we could implement
an algorithm to identify cyclically-reduced potentially positive words of length n
with worst-case time complexity O(n) and constant space. Indeed this is an enticing
prospect.
    The reader may have already guessed that, since this is posed as a question
rather than a proposition, this dream will not come to pass. We will be showing
that no automaton can exist. In fact, we will be showing a more general result.
    Finite state machines are equivalent to Turing machines without a memory tape.
Hence they are called finite state machines, they are a a computation model with
finite, i.e. bounded by a constant, memory. We already know from [9] that a
deterministic Turing machine can recognize PP2 . Thus unrestricted memory is
enough. In fact the algorithm provided uses only linear space (DSPACE(n)), and so
PP2 can be identified by a Turing machine with a linear bound on its memory. Such
an automaton is called a “linear bounded automaton”, and a language which can
be recognized by one is called “context-sensitive”. Other classes of automata exist
between linear bounded automata and finite sate machines. For example context-
free languages are those which can be identified with a push down automaton.
Theorem 6.2. For r ≥ 2, PPr is not a well-nested multiple context-free language.
   Well-nested multiple context-free languages (well-nested MCFLs) are a class of
languages containing all regular languages. Well-nested MCFLs are not a widely
known class of languages, and so it is very likely that readers of this paper will be
unfamiliar with them. We will not make any attempt to change that. A definition
can be found in [7], but our proof will not use the technical details of the defi-
nition. Since the regular languages are contained within the well-nested MCFLs,
Theorem 6.2 will imply the answer to Question 6.1 is “No”. In fact, because we
avoid the technical details and instead use existing results, the reader can substitute
“well-nested MCFL” for “regular” and still completely understand the proof. In
fact other well known families of languages such as context-free languages, ETOL
languages, and tree-adjoining languages are also contained within the well-nested
MCFLs, and can be substituted in the same way.
   We will establish the two instrumental lemmata about well-nested MCFLs:
Lemma 6.3 (Pumping lemma for well-nested MCFLs [7]). If L ⊆ Σ∗ is a well-
nested MCFL, there exists some k ≥ 1 (called the pumping dimension of L) and
some p ≥ 1 (called the pumping length of L) such that, every string s ∈ L with
|s|Σ ≥ p can be written as
                                   s = v0 w1 v1 w2 v2 . . . wk vk
where:
     • {wi | 1 ≤ i ≤ k} ̸= {ε}
     • ∀n ∈ Z≥0 : v0 w1n v1 w2n v2 . . . wkn vk ∈ L
   Naturally this lemma applies to all weaker classes of language. However, a much
simpler pumping lemma exists for regular languages. See [6, Thm. 4.1].3 Both can
be used to exclude PP2 from the respective classes using the same techniques we
will employ.
     3For context-free languages see [6, Thm. 7.18]. For tree adjoining languages see [19, Thm. 4.7].
             GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                            19


Lemma 6.4 ([16, Prp. 6]4). For each well-nested MCFL L1 ⊆ Σ∗ there is a k
such that for every regular language L2 ⊆ Σ∗ , L1 ∩ L2 is a well-nested MCFL with
pumping dimension k.
   For the equivalent on regular languages see [15, Thm. 2.7].5
   From here Theorem 6.2 will be a rather simple corollary of the following:
Lemma 6.5. PP2 is not a well-nested MCFL.
Proof. Assume by way of contradiction that PP2 is a well-nested MCFL with pump-
ing dimension k. Let us consider the language Λk consisting of words of the form:
                                 n1           n2       n2                  nk     m
                                                              ...
where n1 , . . . , nk , m ≥ 1. Since Λk is regular, it follows from Lemma 6.4 that PP2
is a well-nested MCFL only if Λk ∩ PP2 is a well-nested MCFL. We will show first
that if a word w ∈ Λk is potentially positive then ∀i : ni ≥ m − 1.
   Let us consider a word s which is in the language Λk but has some ni < m−1. We
note that s satisfies Goldstein’s Criterion with x = and y = . We will show that
this word no longer satisfies Goldstein’s Criterion after applying the automorphism
  7→ n where n is the minimum ni in s. After applying the automorphism, the
syllable n becomes empty, creating a             subword, so x ̸= . By Lemma 2.12,
the only other option is x = . However,              must appear as a subword because
   m
      appeared in the original word and we have only removed n ≤ m − 2 from
the exponent. Since s is automorphic to a word which does not satisfy Goldstein’s
Criterion it is not potentially positive.
   Now let the pumping length of Lk ∩ PP2 be p. We consider the word
                                      p       p                p           p+1
                            s=                         ...                        ∈ Lk .
This word is potentially positive as we can demonstrate:
                                              p        p               p        p+1
                                s=                           ...
         p                                    k+1
( 7→         )                    7→
       k+1
( 7→             )                7→
( 7→     )                        7→
And thus s ∈ Lk ∩ PP2 .
    |s| = (k + 1)(p + 1) + 5 ≥ p thus Lemma 6.3 should apply to this word. No
wi can contain any of the underlined sections in the following since removing them
(i.e. v0 w10 v1 w20 v2 . . . wk0 vk ) makes the word no longer Lk :
                                          p        p               p        p+1
                                                        ...
There are k + 1 separate segments remaining, so it is impossible for all of them
to contain a wi . Each segment is either a or syllable. No wi can contain any
part of the remaining syllable, since increasing the power on without increasing
the powers of all the other syllables would make the word no longer potentially
positive by the argument above.

    4The presentation in [16] significantly differs from the presentation here. One can refer to
[7, pg. 323] which reports the result in a more harmonious way.
    5For context-free languages see [6, Thm. 7.27], and for tree adjoining languages see [19, Thm.
4.5].
20        GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


   Furthermore, if some non-empty wi contained some part of a remaining syllable,
removing the wi subword would decrease the exponent on that syllable. That would
make it less than m − 1 = p. m cannot decrease because the syllable contains no
wj . Thus the word would no longer be potentially positive.
   There must be a non-empty wi , but none can be contained in any part of s, so
we have a contradiction and PP2 cannot be a well-nested MCFL.                  □
     Now Theorem 6.2 will follow easily:
Proof of Theorem 6.2. By the main result of [4], PPr ∩ Fn = PPn when r ≥ n.
Since Fr is regular, we can apply Lemma 6.4 to see that PPr for r ≥ 2 is a well-
nested MCFL only if PP2 is a well-nested MCFL. Since PP2 is not a well-nested
MCFL, no higher rank is either.                                              □
Corollary 6.6. There is no algorithm to decide cyclically-reduced potentially pos-
itive words using constant space.
   This follows from a classic result in complexity theory (see [17]) which tells us
that if a set is decidable in constant space it is regular.


          Figure 6.7. An Euler diagram indicating the placement of po-
          tential positivity in relation to various classes of formal languages.
          The classes in the classical Chomsky hierarchy are drawn thicker
          and darker than the other classes. The dotted line indicates the
          greatest possible span of PPr for r ≥ 2 with our current under-
          standing.
                                     Semi-decidable

                                       Decidable

                                   Context-sensitive                  PPr

                                  Well-nested MCFL             PP2

                                     Tree-adjoining

                                      Context-free

                                        Regular



                     7. Towards non-trivial upper bounds
  Finding an upper bound for F3 has proven to be more difficult. Whereas in F2
we were able to use the algorithms in [5] and [9] to eliminate words and produce an
upper bound, no algorithm is currently known for higher ranks. In fact, the words
known to not be potentially positive in F3 are fairly restricted.
   (1) Words in the commutator subgroup [F3 , F3 ].
          GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY                   21


      (2) Words in F2 which are not potentially positive under the automorphisms
          of F2 (see [4]) and words which are automorphic to them.
Theorem 3.9 in [8] can be used to show that (2) is exponentially negligible. A slight
narrowing of that theorem to fit this paper:

Theorem 7.1 (Thm 3.9). If w ∈ Fr is a cyclically reduced word in the orbit of a
word v ∈ Fr−1 then w does not contain a primitivity blocking subword.

   By [3, Example 1] if there is a forbidden subword for some subset of a free group
then that set is negligible.
   So then, (1) seems most promising. If we recall the Cohen-Grigorchuk theorem:

Theorem 7.2 (Cohen-Grigorchuk). Let φ : Fr → G be a surjective group homo-
morphism. G is amenable if and only if
                              p
                          lim n gn (ker(φ)) = 2r − 1
                             n→∞

   We refer the reader to [18] for a proof. The implication here is that, because
the abelianization of Fr is amenable, the commutator subgroup coarsely (up to
a sub-exponential factor) grows like (2r − 1)n . This gives us the beginning of a
non-trivial upper bound:

Corollary 7.3. The set of potentially positive words in Fr is not exponentially
generic in the set of all words.

Proof. The set of all words grow as Θ((2r − 1)n ). If the set of potentially positive
words were to be exponentially generic, then its compliment, which contains the
commutator subgroup, would have to grow as O(εn (2r − 1)n ) for some ε < 1.
  Thus
                          p
                      lim n gn ([Fr , Fr ]) ≤ ε(2r − 1) < 2r − 1
                       n→∞

a contradiction with Theorem 7.2.                                                  □

     A more precise asymptotic for the growth of [Fr , Fr ] can be obtained from [14]
as
                                     1           n
(6)                                 √ r (2r − 1)
                                     n
This tells us that the commutator subgroup is in fact negligible (only not exponen-
tially so).
   We summarize the current situation in this table:
                   pos.      prim.          p. pos.6            all
                             √ n 
             F2 Θ (2n )    Θ     3        Θ (2.505n )         Θ(3n )
              F3   Θ (3n )   Θ (n3n )     Ω (4.024n )      Θ(5n )
                       n           n               n
              F4   Θ (4 )    Θ (n5 )      Ω (5.746 )       Θ(7n )
                       n           n               n
              F5   Θ (5 )    Θ (n7 )      Ω (7.509 )       Θ(9n )
                       n           n               n
              F6   Θ (6 )    Θ (n9 )      Ω (9.290 )      Θ(11n )
                       n            n               n
              F7   Θ (7 )    Θ (n11 )    Ω (11.083 )      Θ(13n )
              Fr   Θ (r ) Θ (n(2r − 3) ) Ω ((2r − 3) ) Θ ((2r − 1)n )
                       n              n              n
22         GROWTH AND LANGUAGE COMPLEXITY OF POTENTIAL POSITIVITY


                                        References
 [1] Gilbert Baumslag, Positive one-relator groups, Transactions of the American Mathematical
     Society 156 (May 1971) (en).
 [2] Gilbert Baumslag, Alexei G. Myasnikov, and Vladimir Shpilrain, Open problems in combi-
     natorial group theory, Contemporary Mathematics, 1999, pp. 1–27 (en).
 [3] Tullio Ceccherini-Silberstein and Wolfgang Woess, Growth and ergodicity of context-free lan-
     guages, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 354 (2002), no. 11, 4597–4625. MR1926891
 [4] Aaron Clark and Richard Goldstein, Stability of numerical invariants in free groups, Com-
     munications in Algebra 33 (October 2005), no. 11, 4097–4104 (en).
 [5] Richard Goldstein, An algorithm for potentially positive words in F2 , Contemporary Math-
     ematics 421 (2006), 157–168 (en).
 [6] John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D. Ullman, Introduction to automata theory,
     languages, and computation, 3rd ed., Pearson, Bosten San Francisco Munich, 2007 (eng).
 [7] Makoto Kanazawa, The pumping lemma for well-nested multiple context-free languages, De-
     velopments in Language Theory, 2009, pp. 312–325 (en). Series Title: Lecture Notes in Com-
     puter Science.
 [8] Lucy Koch-Hyde, Siobhan O’Connor, Eamonn Olive, and Vladimir Shpilrain, Orbit-blocking
     words in free groups, J. Group Theory (2025).
 [9] Lucy Koch-Hyde, Siobhan O’Connor, and Eamonn Olive, Complexity of recognizing poten-
     tially positive elements in the free group of rank 2, Int. J. of Algebra and Comput. (2025)
     (en).
[10] Douglas A. Lind and Brian Marcus, An introduction to symbolic dynamics and coding, Second
     edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2021 (eng).
[11] Marco Linton, Residually rationally solvable one-relator groups, Bull. of London Math. Soc.
     (October 2025), blms.70210 (en).
[12] D. Puder and C. Wu, Growth of primitive elements in free groups, Journal of the London
     Mathematical Society 90 (201405), no. 1, 89–104, available at https://academic.oup.com/
     jlms/article-pdf/90/1/89/9682782/jdu009.pdf.
[13] Igor Rivin, A remark on ‘Counting primitive elements in free groups’ (by J. Burillo and E.
     Ventura), Geometriae Dedicata 107 (August 2004), no. 1, 99–100.
[14]         , Growth in free groups (and other stories)—twelve years later, Illinois Journal of
     Mathematics 54 (2010), no. 1, 327 –370.
[15] Arto Salomaa, Jewels of formal language theory, Computer Science Press, Rockville, Md,
     1981 (eng).
[16] H. Seki and Y. Kato, On the generative power of multiple context-free grammars and macro
     grammars, IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems E91-D (February 2008), no. 2,
     209–221 (en).
[17] R. E. Stearns, J. Hartmanis, and P. M. Lewis, Hierarchies of memory-limited computations,
     6th Annual Symposium on Switching Circuit Theory and Logical Design (SWCT 1965), 1965,
     pp. 179–190 (en).
[18] Ryszard Szwarc, A short proof of the Grigorchuk-Cohen cogrowth theorem, Journal of the
     American Mathematical Society 106 (July 1989), 663–665 (en).
[19] K. Vijayshanker, David J. Weir, and Aravind K. Joshi, Characterizing structural descriptions
     produced by various grammatical formalisms, Proceedings of the 25th annual meeting on
     Association for Computational Linguistics -, 1987, pp. 104–111 (en).
[20] Daniel T. Wise, The residual finiteness of positive one-relator groups, Comment. Math. Helv.
     76 (June 2001), no. 2, 314–338 (en).

     Department of Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016
     Email address: emmad4867@gmail.com

     Department of Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016
     Email address: lhyde@gradcenter.cuny.edu

     Department of Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016
     Email address: doconnor@gradcenter.cuny.edu

     Email address: ejolive97@gmail.com
