                                                             GENERICITY OF FILLING ELEMENTS

                                                                                  BRENT B. SOLIE
arXiv:1007.4022v1 [math.GR] 22 Jul 2010




                                                   Abstract. An element of a finitely generated non-Abelian free group F (X)
                                                   is said to be filling if that element has positive translation length in every very
                                                   small minimal isometric action of F (X) on an R-tree. We give a proof that the
                                                   set of filling elements of F (X) is exponentially F (X)-generic in the sense of
                                                   Arzhantseva and Ol’shanskiı̆. We also provide an algebraic sufficient condition
                                                   for an element to be filling and show that there exists an exponentially F (X)-
                                                   generic subset of filling elements whose membership problem is solvable in
                                                   linear time.




                                                                                1. Introduction
                                             Statistical group theory is a fairly new area of mathematics that has generated
                                          a great deal of active research in recent years. A typical result in this area usually
                                          concerns the probability with which a random group element satisfies a given prop-
                                          erty. Properties which are held by almost all sufficiently long elements of a given
                                          finitely generated group are especially interesting, and we informally refer to such
                                          properties as generic.
                                             The earliest occurence of the notion of genericity appears to be due to Guba
                                          [15]. Shortly afterwards, Gromov gave a formal definition in the context of finitely
                                          presented groups [14]. In the same paper, Gromov asserts that almost every finitely
                                          presented group is hyperbolic, a fact first proved by Ol’shanskiı̆ [28] and later by
                                          Champetier [10, 11]. Subsequent results in statistical group theory include the work
                                          of Arzhantseva [1, 2], Arzhantseva and Ol’shanskiı̆ [3], and Ollivier [24, 23, 25, 26].
                                          The surveys by Ghys [13] and Ollivier [27] provide an excellent overview of genericity
                                          with a focus on random groups. More recent results in statistical group theory
                                          apply the notion of genericity to computational group theory. Some group-theoretic
                                          decision problems with high worst-case complexity have been shown to have low
                                          complexity on a generic set of inputs [20, 21]. These results have furthered the
                                          understanding of the average-case complexity of these problems [18, 19].
                                             The focus of the present paper is to investigate the generic geometric behavior
                                          of elements of a finitely generated non-Abelian free group. Our investigation is
                                          motivated by the notion of a filling element, first introduced by Kapovich and
                                          Lustig as a free group analogue of a filling curve on a surface [17]. Filling curves
                                          have been important in the theory of surface groups and may be characterized by
                                          a number of equivalent geometric and algebraic properties.
                                             Let Σ be a closed, orientable surface of genus at least two. By a surface group
                                          we mean the fundamental group of such a surface Σ. Let α and β be closed curves

                                             Date: January 2, 2018.
                                             2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 20P05, Secondary 03D15, 20E08, 20F65.
                                             Key words and phrases. geometric group theory, statistical group theory, free group, filling
                                          element, genericity.
                                                                                           1
2                                  BRENT B. SOLIE


on Σ. The geometric intersection number, denoted i(α, β), is the least number of
intersections between members of the free homotopy classes of α and β. If β is such
that i(α, β) > 0 for every essential simple closed curve α, then we say that β is a
filling curve.
    Recall that the dual tree associated to an essential simple closed curve α on Σ is
a simplicial tree equipped with a small minimal isometric action by π1 (Σ). (From
now on, we will assume all of our group actions on trees are minimal and isometric.)
It is well-known that if β is a (not necessarily simple) closed curve on Σ, then the
translation length of β on Tα , denoted ||β||Tα , is equal to i(α, β). Therefore, a
closed curve β is filling if and only if it has positive translation length on Tα for
every essential simple closed curve α.
    As a consequence of Skora’s duality theorem, any simplicial tree equipped with
a small action by π1 (Σ) can be collapsed down to a tree Tα for some essential
simple closed curve α. Therefore, a closed curve β is filling if and only if it has
positive translation length in every small action of π1 (Σ) on a simplicial tree. An
application of Bass-Serre theory shows that a closed curve β is filling if and only if
it is not conjugate into a vertex group of any elementary cyclic splitting of π1 (Σ).
    We now move from surface groups to consider a finitely generated non-Abelian
free group F (X). Recall that the Culler-Vogtmann outer space, denoted CV (F (X)),
is the projectivized space of free discrete actions of F (X) on simplicial trees. Outer
space is the free group counterpart to Teichmüller space in the sense that it admits a
properly discontinuous isometric action by the outer automorphism group of F (X)
[12]. More, outer space also admits a Thurston-type compactification CV (F (X)),
where CV (F (X)) is the projectivized space of very small actions of F (X) on R-trees
[4].
    In [17], Kapovich and Lustig introduce the notion of a filling element as a free
group analogue for a filling curve. A filling element is an element w ∈ F (X) that
has positive translation length in every very small action of F (X) on an R-tree. In
the same paper, Kapovich and Lustig prove that almost every prefix of almost every
freely reduced right-infinite word on the letters X ± := X ∪ X −1 is a filling element
of F (X) [17, Theorem 13.6]. This result echoes the work of Bonahon showing that
filling is the typical behavior of closed curves on a closed orientable hyperbolic
surface [5, 6, 7].
    However, the proof of Kapovich and Lustig’s theorem is non-constructive; we
would still like to find an algorithmically verifiable sufficient condition for a free
group element to be filling. Further, we would like to find such a condition which
is also generic in the following formal sense of Arzhantseva and Ol’shanskiı̆. Let
S be the set of elements of F (X) satisfying a given condition. We say that S is
F (X)-generic if
                                       #(S ∩ Bn )
                                  lim              = 1,
                                 n→∞      #Bn
where Bn := {w ∈ F (X) : |w|X ≤ n} [21]. If the limit converges to 1 exponentially
fast, we say that S is exponentially F (X)-generic. We will give a slightly more
general definition of genericity in Definition 2.3.
    The main result of this paper is:
Theorem 3.7. Let F (X) be a finitely generated non-Abelian free group.
   (1) Let w ∈ F (X). If the stabilizer of w in Aut F (X) is infinite cyclic, then w
       is filling.
                          GENERICITY OF FILLING ELEMENTS                                3


    (2) The set of filling elements of F (X) is exponentially F (X)-generic.
    (3) There exists an exponentially F (X)-generic subset S of F (X) such that
        every element of S is filling and the membership problem for S is solvable
        in linear time.
   The proof of Theorem 3.7 relies on the construction of an exponentially F (X)-
generic set T S ′ constructed to study the generic-case complexity of Whitehead’s
algorithm [21]. Let T S be the set of all cyclically reduced elements of F (X) which
are not proper powers, whose conjugacy classes are fixed by no relabeling Whitehead
automorphism, and whose cyclic length is strictly increased by every non-inner, non-
relabeling Whitehead automorphism. (Whitehead automorphisms will be defined
formally in Definition 2.4.) The set T S ′ is defined as the set of all elements of
F (X) whose cyclic reductions are elements of T S. The set T S ′ satisfies a number
of important properties, outlined in Proposition 3.2.
   The other main ingredient in the proof of Theorem 3.7 is an analysis of the
structure of vertex groups in elementary cyclic splittings of F (X). The work of
Guirardel [16] implies that a non-filling element must be conjugate into such a vertex
group. The algebraic structure of these vertex groups, detailed in in Proposition
3.1, implies part (1) of Theorem 3.7. Parts (2) and (3) then follow from part (1)
and the properties of the set T S ′ .

                                  2. Preliminaries
   By X we will always denote a finite set with #X ≥ 2. Let F (X) be the free
group on the set of letters X.
   An R-tree is a geodesic metric space in which any two points are connected by
a unique simple path. We continue to assume that every action of F (X) on an
R-tree is isometric and minimal. An action of F (X) on an R-tree is very small if
the stabilizer of any tripod is trivial and the stabilizer of any arc is either trivial or
maximal cyclic in the stabilizers of the endpoints of the arc. For w ∈ F (X) and T
an R-tree on which F (X) acts, then the translation length of w is defined to be
                               ||w||T := inf dT (p, w(p)).
                                         p∈T

Definition 2.1. Let w ∈ F (X). We say that w is a filling element if ||w||T > 0
for every very small action of F (X) on an R-tree T . We say that w is a non-filling
element if ||w||T = 0 for some very small action of F (X) on an R-tree T .
   The work of Guirardel allows us to approximate the very small action of F (X)
on a given R-tree by very small actions on a simplicial trees [16]. In particular, if
w ∈ F (X) fixes a point in a very small action on an R-tree, it must also fix a point
in a very small action on a simplicial tree. This implies:
Proposition 2.1. An element w ∈ F (X) is non-filling if and only if ||w||T = 0 for
some very small action of F (X) on a simplicial tree T .
   Recall that a very small action of F (X) on a simplicial tree gives a decomposition
of F (X) as the fundamental group of a graph of groups with cyclic edge groups.
We briefly review some of the associated terminology.
Definition 2.2. A cyclic splitting of F (X) is the decomposition of F (X) as the
fundamental group of a graph of groups with cyclic edge groups. A boundary map
in a cyclic splitting is a map from an edge group to a vertex group. A cyclic splitting
4                                  BRENT B. SOLIE


of F (X) is elementary if the corresponding graph of groups is connected and has
exactly one edge. An elementary cyclic splitting of F (X) is a segment of groups
if it has two distinct vertices and is a loop of groups if it has a single vertex. An
elementary cyclic splitting is nontrivial if it is either a loop of groups, or it is a
segment of groups in which neither boundary map is an isomorphism. Given any
splitting of F (X), we say that w ∈ F (X) is elliptic with respect to this splitting if
w is conjugate to an element of a vertex group. Elements of F (X) which are not
elliptic in a given splitting are said to be hyperbolic.
   We will find it useful to slightly generalize the notion of F (X)-genericity pre-
sented in the introduction. The following notion of genericity referred to as the
Arzhantseva-Ol’shanskiı̆ model of genericity, and the specific terminology is due to
Kapovich, Schupp, and Shpilrain [21].
Definition 2.3. Let S ⊆ T ⊆ F (X). We say that S is T -generic if
                                    #(S ∩ Bn )
                                 lim           = 1,
                                n→∞ #(T ∩ Bn )

where Bn := {w ∈ F (X) : |w|X ≤ n} and |w|X denotes the word length of the
element w with respect to the basis X. If the above limit converges exponentially
fast, we say that S is exponentially T -generic. If T − S is (exponentially) T -generic,
then we say that S is (exponentially) T -negligable.
   Recall that for the standard basis X of F (X), we have a corresponding set of
Whitehead automorphisms which act as a finite generating set for Aut F (X). Each
of these Whitehead automorphism falls into one of the two following categories.
Definition 2.4. An automorphism σ : F (X) → F (X) is called a type I White-
head automorphism (or a relabeling Whitehead automorphism) if σ is induced by a
permutation on the set X ± := X ∪ X −1 .
   An automorphism σ : F (X) → F (X) is called a type II Whitehead auto-
morphism if there is an element a ∈ X ± such that for all x ∈ X ± , we have
σ(x) ∈ {x, xa, a−1 x, xa }, where xa := z −1 xa.

                                  3. Main Results
3.1. Cyclic Splittings of F (X). The structure of elementary cyclic splittings of
free groups has been well-studied. A topological lemma due to Bestvina and Feighn
[4, Lemma 4.1] can be used to characterize one-relator presentations of F (X),
resulting in the following characterization of vertex groups of cyclic splittings. The
following proposition may also be obtained from earlier results in [30], [31], or [32].
Proposition 3.1. If F (X) has the structure of a nontrivial segment of groups with
cyclic edge group, then its vertex groups must have the form hA, bi and hBi, where
A ⊔ B is a basis for F (X), #B ≥ 2, and b ∈ hBi.
   If F (X) has the structure of a nontrivial loop of groups with cyclic edge group,
then its vertex group must have the form hU, uv i, where U ⊔ {v} is a basis for F (X)
and u ∈ hU i.
3.2. The Set T S ′ . In [21], Kapovich, Schupp, and Shpilrain construct an exponen-
tially F (X)-generic set with several important properties related to Whitehead’s
algorithm.
                         GENERICITY OF FILLING ELEMENTS                               5


Definition 3.1. Let C ⊆ F (X) be the set of cyclically and freely reduced elements
of F (X). The set T S is the set of w ∈ C which are not proper powers, whose cyclic
length is increased by every non-inner type II Whitehead automorphism, and whose
conjugacy class is fixed by no type I Whitehead automorphism. The set T S ′ is the
set of elements w ∈ F (X) whose cyclic reductions are in T S.
Proposition 3.2 ([21, Theorem 8.5]). Let #X ≥ 2 and let T S ′ ⊆ F (X) be as
above.
    (1) The set T S ′ is exponentially F (X)-generic.
    (2) For any nontrivial w ∈ T S ′ , the stabilizer of w in Aut F (X) is the infinite
        cyclic group generated by right-conjugation by w.
    (3) The membership problem for T S ′ is solvable in linear time.
    We very briefly summarize the arguments presented in [21]. Let N := #X. Let
w ∈ C have cyclic length n. For every x ∈ X ± , define wx to be the number of
occurrences of x in w. Likewise, for every x, y ∈ X ± such that x 6= y −1 , define wxy
to be the number of occurrences of xy as a subword of w written as a cyclic word.
    Let ǫ > 0. Let L(ǫ) be the set of all w ∈ C such that for all x, y ∈ X ± where
x 6= y −1 , we have
                                                                               
    wx         1         1            wxy           1                  1
         ∈        − ǫ,      + ǫ and        ∈                − ǫ,                +ǫ .
     n        2N       2N              n       2N (2N − 1)       2N (2N − 1)
    If τ is a type II Whitehead automorphism, the difference in cyclic length between
w and τ (w) is easily calculated in terms of the quantities wx and wxy (see [22], [29]).
Let 0 < ǫ < (2N − 3)/N (2N − 1)(4N − 3). If w ∈ L(ǫ) for such an ǫ, the quantities
wx and wxy nearly uniformly distributed. It is then fairly straightforward to see
that any non-inner type II Whitehead automorphism will necessarily increase the
cyclic length of w ∈ L(ǫ).
    Using some deep results from large deviation theory, one can further show that
the set L(ǫ) itself is C-generic. Since L(ǫ) is C-generic, the set L′ (ǫ) consisting of
elements of F (X) whose cyclic reductions are in L(ǫ) is F (X)-generic. Although
L′ (ǫ) may contain elements whose conjugacy class is fixed by a type I Whitehead
automorphism, the set of such elements is F (X)-negligable and may be safely dis-
carded to obtain a subset of T S ′ which is F (X)-generic. We conclude that T S ′
itself is also F (X)-generic.
    Suppose now that w ∈ T S. If α ∈ Aut F (X) is such that α(w) = w, recall
that Whitehead’s theorem states that α can be written as a sequence of White-
head automorphisms α = τm ◦ · · · ◦ τ1 such that τi+1 does not increase the cyclic
length of τi ◦ . . . τ1 (w). Since w ∈ T S and T S is closed under type I Whitehead
automorphisms and cyclic permutations, each τi must be either a type I Whitehead
automorphism or it must cyclically permute w. We may therefore write α = γ ◦ σ,
where σ is a type I Whitehead automorphism and γ is an inner automorphism.
Since the conjugacy class of w cannot be fixed by a type I Whitehead automor-
phism, σ must be trivial, and so α itself must be inner. It follows directly that α
can only be conjugation by some power of w, since w is not a proper power itself.
A slight modification to this argument shows that any w′ whose cyclic reduction is
w also has a cyclic stabilizer in Aut F (X).
    To algorithmically decide whether an element w′ belongs to T S ′ , we first pass to
the cyclic reduction of w′ , denoted by w, in time linear in the length of w′ . We then
decide whether w ∈ T S. It is well-known how to check whether w is a proper power
6                                  BRENT B. SOLIE


or not in time linear in the length of w. Checking whether the cyclic length of w
increases under any non-inner type II Whitehead automorphisms or whether any
type I Whitehead automorphism fixes the conjugacy class of w can each be done
in linear time since the number of Whitehead automorphisms of F (X) is constant.
Remark. Although the membership problem for T S ′ is linear in the length of the
input, it has a factorial dependence on the rank of F (X) due to the growth of the
set of Whitehead automorphisms. It is worth noting that we can circumvent this
dependence by passing to L′ (ǫ), which is exponentially T S ′ -generic for the suffi-
ciently small values of ǫ given above. The membership problem for L′ (ǫ) requires
only that we check the counts on a given word’s one- and two-letter subwords, which
can be done in linear time without any dependence on the rank of the ambient free
group.
3.3. Genericity of Filling Elements. We first consider the case where w ∈ F (X)
is elliptic in an elementary splitting of F (X) over the trivial group.
Lemma 3.3. Let w ∈ F (X) be elliptic in an elementary splitting of F (X) over a
trivial group. Then w has non-cyclic stabilizer in Aut F (X).
Proof. To say that w is elliptic in an elementary splitting of F (X) over a trivial
group is equivalent to saying that w is contained in a proper free factor of F (X).
Suppose that w is not a proper power. Let A ⊔ B be a basis for F (X) such that
#A, #B ≥ 1 and w ∈ hAi. Let σ : F (X) → F (X) be right-conjugation by w.
Define τ : F (X) → F (X) via
                                      (
                                        xw if x ∈ A,
                              τ (x) =
                                        x   if x ∈ B,
   where xw := w−1 xw. Both σ and τ fix w. However, σ fixes exactly hwi, while
τ fixes hw, Bi. Thus σ must be distinct from every power of τ , so the Aut F (X)
stabilizer of w cannot be cyclic.
   If w = z r where r > 1 and z is not a proper power, then z is elliptic in an
elementary cyclic splitting if and only if w is elliptic in that same splitting. We
may therefore pass from w to its root z, which is also elliptic in the given splitting.
The argument above shows that z has a non-cyclic stabilizer, and since the stabilizer
of w contains that of z, w must have non-cyclic stabilizer in Aut F (X) as well. 
   Since the set T S ′ is an exponentially F (X)-generic set whose elements all have
cyclic stabilizers in Aut F (X), any set consisting of elements with non-cyclic stabi-
lizers is exponentially F (X)-negligable.
Corollary 3.4. The set of elements of F (X) which lie in a proper free factor of
F (X) is exponentially F (X)-negligable.
Remark. This is a slight generalization of results appearing in [8] and [9], which
show that the set of primitive elements of F (X) is F (X)-negligable.
Lemma 3.5. Let w ∈ F (X) be elliptic in some elementary cyclic splitting of F (X).
Then w has a non-cyclic stabilizer in Aut F (X).
Proof. Suppose that w is not a proper power.
  Let w ∈ F (X) be elliptic in a segment of groups. Then there must exist a basis
A ⊔ B of F (X) such that #A ≥ 1, #B ≥ 2, b ∈ hBi, and either w ∈ hA, bi or
                        GENERICITY OF FILLING ELEMENTS                               7


w ∈ hBi. Note that if b is a proper power of some c ∈ F (X), then we would have
w ∈ hA, ci, so w would remain elliptic in a splitting of the same type. Hence we may
assume that b is not a proper power. Define an automorphism σ : F (X) → F (X)
by                                    (
                                        y, if y ∈ A
                              σ(y) =
                                        y b , if y ∈ B.
   Any power of σ fixes the rank 2 subgroup hA, bi pointwise and so also fixes
w, whereas right-conjugation by w fixes exactly the cyclic subgroup hwi. Right-
conjugation by w must therefore differ from every power of σ, so the stabilizer of
w in Aut F (X) cannot be cyclic.
   If w ∈ hBi, since #A ≥ 1, w lies in a proper free factor of F (X). Lemma 3.3
states that such an element has a non-cyclic stabilizer in Aut F (X).
   Let w ∈ F (X) be elliptic in a loop of groups. There then exists a basis U ⊔{v} of
F (X) such that w ∈ hU, uv i for some u ∈ hU i. We define the map τ : F (X) → F (X)
by
                                 τ (y) = y, if y ∈ U
                                 τ (v) = uv.
   Since u ∈ hU i, τ is an automorphism. In particular, τ fixes the subgroup hU, uv i
pointwise, so no power of τ equals right-conjugation by x, which fixes only the
cyclic subgroup hwi. Again, the stabilizer of w in Aut F (X) therefore cannot be
cyclic.
   We handle the case where w is a proper power in the same way it was handled
in the proof of Lemma 3.3.                                                        
Lemma 3.6. If w ∈ T S ′ , then w is filling.
Proof. We consider instead the set of non-filling elements in F (X). By Proposition
2.1, a non-filling element w fixes a point in some simplicial tree equipped with a
very small action by F (X). This in turn gives a splitting of F (X) over infinite
cyclic and trivial groups. Since w fixes a point in the action, w must be elliptic in
this splitting. We may choose any edge in the splitting and collapse the components
of its complement down to vertices, thereby obtaining an elementary splitting of
F (X) over an infinite cyclic or trivial group in which w is elliptic. Since w is
elliptic in such a splitting, by Lemmas 3.3 and 3.5, the stabilizer of w is non-cyclic
in Aut F (X). By Proposition 3.2, all elements of T S ′ have cyclic stabilizers in
Aut F (X), and so w ∈   / T S ′.                                                    
Theorem 3.7. Let F (X) be a finitely generated non-Abelian free group.
   (1) Let w ∈ F (X). If the stabilizer of w in Aut F (X) is infinite cyclic, then w
       is filling.
  (2) The set of filling elements of F (X) is exponentially F (X)-generic.
   (3) There exists an exponentially F (X)-generic subset S of F (X) such that
       every element of S is filling and the membership problem for S is solvable
       in linear time.
Proof. Part (1) follows from Lemmas 3.3 and 3.5. Since every element of T S ′
has a cyclic stabilizer in Aut F (X) (Proposition 3.2, part (1)), every element of
T S ′ must be filling. Part (2) then follows from the fact that T S ′ is exponentially
8                                        BRENT B. SOLIE


F (X)-generic (Proposition 3.2, part (2)). Finally, Part (3) follows from part (3) of
Proposition 3.2, taking S to be exactly T S ′ .                                    

                                  4. Acknowledgements
  The author would like to thank Ilya Kapovich for his guidance and many valuable
comments and Enric Ventura for a helpful discussion via email.

                                          References
 [1] G. N. Arzhantseva. Generic properties of finitely presented groups and Howson’s theorem.
     Comm. Algebra, 26(11):3783–3792, 1998.
 [2] G. N. Arzhantseva. A property of subgroups of infinite index in a free group. Proc. Amer.
     Math. Soc., 128(11):3205–3210, 2000.
 [3] G. N. Arzhantseva and A. Yu. Ol′ shanskiı̆. Generality of the class of groups in which subgroups
     with a lesser number of generators are free. Mat. Zametki, 59(4):489–496, 638, 1996.
 [4] M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. Outer limits (preprint), 1994.
 [5] Francis Bonahon. Bouts des variétés hyperboliques de dimension 3. Ann. of Math. (2),
     124(1):71–158, 1986.
 [6] Francis Bonahon. The geometry of Teichmüller space via geodesic currents. Invent. Math.,
     92(1):139–162, 1988.
 [7] Francis Bonahon. Geodesic currents on negatively curved groups. In Arboreal group theory
     (Berkeley, CA, 1988), volume 19 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 143–168. Springer,
     New York, 1991.
 [8] Alexandre V. Borovik, Alexei G. Myasnikov, and Vladimir Shpilrain. Measuring sets in in-
     finite groups. In Computational and statistical group theory (Las Vegas, NV/Hoboken, NJ,
     2001), volume 298 of Contemp. Math., pages 21–42. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2002.
 [9] J. Burillo and E. Ventura. Counting primitive elements in free groups. Geom. Dedicata,
     93:143–162, 2002.
[10] Christophe Champetier. Petite simplification dans les groupes hyperboliques. Ann. Fac. Sci.
     Toulouse Math. (6), 3(2):161–221, 1994.
[11] Christophe Champetier. Propriétés statistiques des groupes de présentation finie. Adv. Math.,
     116(2):197–262, 1995.
[12] Marc Culler and Karen Vogtmann. Moduli of graphs and automorphisms of free groups.
     Invent. Math., 84(1):91–119, 1986.
[13] Étienne Ghys. Groupes aléatoires (d’après Misha Gromov,. . . ). Astérisque, (294):viii, 173–
     204, 2004.
[14] M. Gromov. Hyperbolic groups. In Essays in group theory, volume 8 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst.
     Publ., pages 75–263. Springer, New York, 1987.
[15] V. S. Guba. Conditions under which 2-generated subgroups in small cancellation groups are
     free. Izv. Vyssh. Uchebn. Zaved. Mat., (7):12–19, 87, 1986.
[16] Vincent Guirardel. Approximations of stable actions on R-trees. Comment. Math. Helv.,
     73(1):89–121, 1998.
[17] Ilya Kapovich and Martin Lustig. Intersection form, laminations and currents on free groups.
     Geom. Funct. Anal., 19(5):1426–1467, 2010.
[18] Ilya Kapovich, Alexei Miasnikov, Paul Schupp, and Vladimir Shpilrain. Generic-case com-
     plexity, decision problems in group theory, and random walks. J. Algebra, 264(2):665–694,
     2003.
[19] Ilya Kapovich, Alexei Miasnikov, Paul Schupp, and Vladimir Shpilrain. Average-case com-
     plexity and decision problems in group theory. Adv. Math., 190(2):343–359, 2005.
[20] Ilya Kapovich and Paul Schupp. Genericity, the Arzhantseva-Ol′ shanskii method and the
     isomorphism problem for one-relator groups. Math. Ann., 331(1):1–19, 2005.
[21] Ilya Kapovich, Paul Schupp, and Vladimir Shpilrain. Generic properties of Whitehead’s algo-
     rithm and isomorphism rigidity of random one-relator groups. Pacific J. Math., 223(1):113–
     140, 2006.
[22] Roger C. Lyndon and Paul E. Schupp. Combinatorial group theory. Classics in Mathematics.
     Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2001. Reprint of the 1977 edition.
                            GENERICITY OF FILLING ELEMENTS                                       9


[23] Y. Ollivier. Sharp phase transition theorems for hyperbolicity of random groups. Geom.
     Funct. Anal., 14(3):595–679, 2004.
[24] Yann Ollivier. Critical densities for random quotients of hyperbolic groups. C. R. Math. Acad.
     Sci. Paris, 336(5):391–394, 2003.
[25] Yann Ollivier. Cogrowth and spectral gap of generic groups. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble),
     55(1):289–317, 2005.
[26] Yann Ollivier. Effondrement de quotients aléatoires de groupes hyperboliques avec torsion.
     C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris, 341(3):137–140, 2005.
[27] Yann Ollivier. A January 2005 invitation to random groups, volume 10 of Ensaios
     Matemáticos [Mathematical Surveys]. Sociedade Brasileira de Matemática, Rio de Janeiro,
     2005.
[28] A. Yu. Ol′ shanskiı̆. Almost every group is hyperbolic. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 2(1):1–
     17, 1992.
[29] Abdó Roig, Enric Ventura, and Pascal Weil. On the complexity of the Whitehead minimiza-
     tion problem. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 17(8):1611–1634, 2007.
[30] Abe Shenitzer. Decomposition of a group with a single defining relation into a free product.
     Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 6:273–279, 1955.
[31] J. R. Stallings. Free groups which are free products with cyclic amalgamations. Notices
     A.M.S., 1(1):49, 1980.
[32] G. A. Swarup. Decompositions of free groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 40(1):99–102, 1986.

  Department of Mathematics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1409 W.
Green St., Urbana, IL 61801
  E-mail address: solie@math.uiuc.edu
