                                                  Aperiodicity properties of automorphism groups of free
                                                                         products
                                                                                     Yassine Guerch

                                                                                     January 8, 2026
arXiv:2601.03947v1 [math.GR] 7 Jan 2026




                                                                                          Abstract
                                                       Let G “ G1 ˚. . .˚Gk ˚FN be a free product of finitely presented groups, where FN
                                                   is a free group of rank N P N. Let OutpG, Gq be the subgroup of OutpGq preserving
                                                   the set of conjugacy classes G “ trG1 s, . . . , rGk su. Under natural conditions on the
                                                   groups Gi with i P t1, . . . , ku, we prove that the group OutpG, Gq has a finite index
                                                   subgroup IApG, G, 3q with notable aperiodicity properties. We show that the group
                                                   IApG, G, 3q is torsion free and, if ϕ P IApG, G, 3q, every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class
                                                   of elements of G is in fact fixed by ϕ and every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class of free
                                                   factors of G is fixed by ϕ.
                                                       As an application, we prove that, for every toral relatively hyperbolic group G,
                                                   the group OutpGq has a finite index subgroup IApG, 3q with the same above men-
                                                   tioned aperiodicity properties. We in particular give another proof of the theorem,
                                                   due to Handel–Mosher, that the kernel of the action of OutpFN q on H1 pFN , Z{3Zq
                                                   satisfies natural aperiodicity properties. 1


                                          1       Introduction
                                          Let G be a finitely generated group and let ϕ P OutpGq be an outer automorphism of
                                          G. When studying dynamical properties of ϕ, one often needs to pass to a power of ϕ so
                                          that any periodic orbit is pointwise fixed. However, this power generally depends on the
                                          chosen outer automorphism and is not stable by composition. This is why constructing a
                                          finite index subgroup of OutpGq in which every outer automorphism has pointwise fixed
                                          periodic orbits is particularly useful in practice.
                                              We illustrate this philosophy with three standard examples. The first famous example
                                          of a group G whose outer automorphism group contains such an aperiodic finite index
                                          subgroup is the free abelian group Zn of rank n ě 1. Indeed, it is a standard result of
                                          Minkowski that the group

                                                                       IApZn , 3q “ ker pGLn pZq Ñ GLn pZ{3Zqq
                                              1
                                              Keywords: outer automorphism groups, free products of groups, group actions on trees, JSJ decom-
                                          positions of groups. AMS codes: 20E36, 20F65, 20F28, 20E08




                                                                                              1
is torsion free. From this it is easy to deduce that, for every ϕ P IApZn , 3q, every
ϕ-periodic element of Zn is fixed by ϕ (see for instance Proposition 6.1).
    When G is the fundamental group of a closed, connected, hyperbolic surface Σ, the
mapping class group MCGpΣq “ Outpπ1 pΣqq of the surface Σ also contains a finite index
subgroup with remarkable aperiodicity properties. Indeed, Serre [Ser] proved that the
group
                  IApπ1 pΣq, 3q “ ker pMCGpΣq Ñ AutpH1 pΣ, Z{3Zqqq
is also torsion free. Moreover, Ivanov [Iva, Theorem 1.2] later proved that if ϕ P MCGpΣq,
the homotopy class of any ϕ-periodic simple closed curve of Σ is fixed by ϕ and the ho-
motopy class of any ϕ-periodic subsurface of Σ is fixed by ϕ. Ivanov then used the group
IApπ1 pΣq, 3q to prove a Tits alternative for MCGpΣq: every subgroup of IApπ1 pΣq, 3q
either contains a nonabelian free subgroup or is free abelian. His proof relies on the
action of IApπ1 pΣq, 3q on the Teichmüller space T pΣq and its Thurston compactification
T pΣq, where the above mentioned aperiodicity properties of IApπ1 pΣq, 3q translates into
aperiodicity properties of the action of IApπ1 pΣq, 3q on T pΣq. Later, Kida [Kid] worked
in the group IApπ1 pΣq, 3q to prove that the group MCGpΣq is rigid in the sense of mea-
sure equivalence. This similarly uses the fact that aperiodicity properties of IApπ1 pΣq, 3q
gives aperiodicity properties of the action of IApπ1 pΣq, 3q on the curve complex of Σ.
     Let FN be a free group of rank N ě 1. Handel–Mosher [HM1] proved that OutpFN q
also contains a finite index subgroup with notable aperiodicity properties. Indeed, let

                   IApFN , 3q “ ker pOutpFN q Ñ AutpH1 pFN , Z{3Zqqq .

The group IApFN , 3q is torsion free (see for instance [BFH3, Corollary 5.7.6]). Handel–
Mosher proved that for every ϕ P IApFN , 3q, every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class of elements
in FN is fixed by ϕ ([HM1, Theorem II.4.1]) and that every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class
of free factors of FN is preserved by ϕ ([HM1, Theorem II.3.1]). Later, they proved
that every virtually abelian subgroup of IApFN , 3q is abelian [HM2], and the author
proved that IApFN , 3q satisfies the unique root property [Gue]. As in the surface case,
these aperiodicity properties turn out to be useful to understand structural properties
of the group OutpFN q, such as the Tits alternative [BFH3, BFH2, BFH4], subgroup
decomposition properties [HM1] or the measure equivalence rigidity [GH3]. This relies
on the fact that the aperiodicity properties of IApFN , 3q also translates into aperiodic-
ity properties of the action of IApFN , 3q on some natural OutpFN q-complexes, such as
Culler–Vogtmann’s Outer space [CV] or the free factor complex [BF].
    The aim of the present paper is to construct finite index subgroups with nice aperiod-
icity properties for larger families of outer automorphisms of groups. Recall that a toral
relatively hyperbolic group is a torsion free finitely generated group which is hyperbolic
relative to finitely generated free abelian groups. This includes in particular all torsion
free Gromov hyperbolic groups, but also all Sela’s limit groups (see [Ali, Dah1]). We in
particular prove the following theorem.

Theorem 1.1 (see Corollary 6.7). Let G be a toral relatively hyperbolic group. There
exists a finite index subgroup IApG, 3q of OutpGq with the following properties.

                                             2
 (1) The group IApG, 3q is torsion free.

 (2) If ϕ P IApG, 3q, every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class of elements of G is fixed by ϕ.

 (3) If ϕ P IApG, 3q, every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class of free factors of G is fixed by ϕ.

 (4) If Φ P AutpGq is such that rΦs P IApG, 3q, every Φ-periodic element of G is fixed
     by Φ.

    The construction of IApG, 3q is explicit and it coincides with the above mentioned
groups when G is free, free abelian or the fundamental group of a surface. We in partic-
ular give another proof of the free group case which does not use the CT map technology
introduced by Feighn–Handel [FH]. Instead, we use group actions on canonical trees and
the first generation of (relative) train tracks for free products, see [CT, FM, Lym2] and
the seminal work of Bestvina–Handel [BH] in the free group setting. In fact, most of the
results in the present article are proved in the general context of free products.
    A free product is a couple pG, Gq where G is a finitely generated group and G “
trG1 s, . . . , rGk su is a finite set of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups of G
such that
                                        G “ G1 ˚ . . . ˚ Gk ˚ FN ,
where FN is a free group of rank N P N. By Stallings’ theorem about ends of groups [Sta],
every finitely generated, infinitely-ended, torsion free group admits a nontrivial free
product structure. Let ξpG, Gq “ k ` N be the Grushko rank of pG, Gq.
    We study the group OutpG, Gq of outer automorphisms of G which preserve the set
G. This group is a natural generalisation of OutpFN q and has been intensively studied
over the last decades [GL3, Hor2, FM, GH1, GH2, DL, Lym1]. If, for every rGi s P G,
the group Gi is one-ended, then OutpGq “ OutpG, Gq.
    Our aim in this paper is to find an aperiodic finite index subgroup of OutpG, Gq,
that is, a finite index subgroup which satisfy the four assertions in Theorem 1.1. There
are natural obstructions for the existence of such an aperiodic finite index subgroup.
For instance, if there exists rGi s P G such that OutpGi q has no aperiodic finite index
subgroup, then we cannot find such an aperiodic finite index subgroup for OutpG, Gq.
We prove that this is essentially the only restriction. Indeed, we gather in what we call
the Standing Assumptions all the hypotheses on the groups Gi , OutpGi q and AutpGi q
that we need in order to construct an aperiodic finite index subgroup for OutpG, Gq
(see Section 3.1). Basically, we assume that Gi is finitely presented, that Gi is torsion
free and that OutpGi q and AutpGi q contain aperiodic finite index subgroups. We in
fact assume that OutpGi q satisfies a stronger statement than Item p2q of Theorem 1.1
since we also assume that the same is true replacing conjugacy classes of elements by
conjugacy classes of periodic subgroups. Our main theorem is the following.

Theorem 1.2 (see Proposition 3.11, Theorems 4.1, 5.1, Corollary 4.10). Let pG, Gq be a
free product satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Then OutpG, Gq contains an aperiodic
finite index subgroup IApG, G, 3q.


                                               3
     Again the construction of the aperiodic finite index subgroup IApG, G, 3q is explicit.
It is built out of the aperiodic finite index subgroups of the groups OutpGi q with rGi s P G,
the finite index subgroup of OutpG, Gq fixing elementwise the set G and the finite index
subgroup of OutpG, Gq acting trivially on H1 pG, Z{3Zq.
     It must be noted that the construction of a finite index subgroup of OutpG, Gq sat-
isfying Item p3q of Theorem 1.1 depends on the construction of a finite index subgroup
of OutpG, Gq satisfying Item p2q of Theorem 1.1. Indeed, let G “ G1 ˚ G2 ˚ F3 , let
Φi P AutpGi q be of infinite order and let Φ3 P AutpF3 q be a nontrivial automorphism of
finite order. Let x P F3 be a primitive element of F3 such that the size of the Φ3 -orbit
of x is the order of Φ3 . Let Φ P AutpGq acting as Φi on Gi and as Φ3 on F3 . Then Φ is
of infinite order and G1 ˚ xxy is a periodic free factor of Φ and its period depends on the
order of Φ3 .
     We now sketch the proof of Theorem 1.2. Let IApG, G, 3q, let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q and let
Φ P ϕ. Consider the group G ¸Φ Z, that is, the semi-direct product of G by Z induced
by the automorphism Φ. The isomorphism class of this group only depends on the outer
class ϕ, so we will denote G ¸Φ Z by Gϕ . As explained before, the proof of each item
of the aperiodicity properties of ϕ relies on the construction of an action of G on a tree
T which is ϕ-invariant: the action of G on T extends to an action of Gϕ . The quotient
GzT has a natural structure of a graph of groups and Φ induces an automorphism of
the graph of groups GzT .
     Informally, the source of periodic behaviours for an automorphism of a graph of
groups is twofold. Firstly, an automorphism of a graph of groups GzT induces an auto-
morphism of the underlying graph GzT of GzT . This first source of periodicity is ruled
out by the fact that Φ acts trivially on H1 pG, Z{3Zq. Indeed, this will imply that Φ also
acts trivially on H1 pGzT , Z{3Zq and an elementary observation (see Lemma 3.5) shows
that Φ induces a trivial automorphism of the graph GzT . Secondly, if an automorphism
of GzT fixes pointwise the graph GzT , it induces automorphisms of the vertex groups of
GzT which may have periodic behaviors. This source of periodicity is more delicate to
deal with and it heavily depends on the tree T .
     The construction of the ϕ-invariant tree T is different according to the item of The-
orem 1.1 one wants to prove. We explain it in the case of ϕ-periodic conjugacy classes
of elements and ϕ-periodic conjugacy classes of free factors. Let g P G whose conjugacy
class rgs is ϕ-periodic and let H “ trxΦn pgqysunPN . Since rgs is ϕ-periodic, it is a finite set
of conjugacy classes of cyclic subgroups of G. Since pG, Gq is a free product, the group
G is hyperbolic relative to G. Moreover, by induction on the Grushko rank of pG, Gq,
we may assume that G is one-ended relative to G Y H, that is, there does not exist a
proper free product structure pG, Fq of G such that, for every rAs P G Y H there exists
rBs P F with A Ď B. In that case, Guirardel–Levitt [GL2] constructed a canonical
(JSJ) ϕ-invariant tree T with a G-action such that all edge stabilisers are either cyclic or
conjugate into some Gi . Moreover, every subgroup xΦn pgqy with n P N is elliptic in T ,
and every vertex stabiliser is either a conjugate of some Gi , cyclic, a surface group or a
so-called rigid stabiliser, that is the image of ϕ in the outer automorphism group of the
vertex group is finite (see Theorem 2.13). The vertex groups are therefore sufficiently


                                               4
simple so that one can show that the action of ϕ on every vertex group is aperiodic. This
is done in Section 4.
    We now turn to ϕ-periodic conjugacy classes of free factors. In fact, it is equivalent to
show that, if pG, Fq is a free product structure on G such that F is ϕ-periodic, then F is
fixed by ϕ. Let pG, Fq be such a ϕ-periodic free product structure. Again, an inductive
argument shows that we may assume that the Grushko rank of pG, Fq is maximal among
all ϕ-periodic free product structures pG, Fq. There are two sorts of such maximal free
product structures, depending on whether there exists or not a ϕ-periodic tree T with a
G-action such that every edge stabiliser is trivial and F is the set of conjugacy classes
of nontrivial vertex stabilisers of T .
    If there does not exist such a ϕ-periodic tree, then one can show using standard
arguments from the theory of relative train tracks (see [Lym1]) that we can associate to
F an attracting lamination ΛF of ϕ. Let B8 pG, Gq be the Bowditch boundary associated
with the relatively hyperbolic structure pG, Gq. A lamination of pG, Gq is a closed, G-
invariant, flip-invariant subset of the double boundary

                         B 2 pG, Gq “ B8 pG, Gq ˆ B8 pG, Gq ´ Diag.

An attracting lamination of ϕ is a particular ϕ-periodic lamination of pG, Gq which
encodes informations regarding the dynamics of ϕ on G. It is standard to prove that, in
order to show that ϕ fixes F, it suffices to show that ϕ fixes ΛF (see Lemma 5.14). The
action of ϕ on its (finite) set of attracting laminations is encoded in a relative train track
of ϕ, which is a way to represent ϕ as a homotopy equivalence of a graph of groups. It
then suffices to know that ϕ fixes elementwise the sets G and H1 pG, Z{3Zq to show that
ϕ fixes elementwise its set of attracting laminations as well as F.
    Finally, assume that F is the set of conjugacy classes of nontrivial vertex stabilisers
of some ϕ-periodic G-tree T with trivial edge stabilisers. Let ℓ ą 0 be such that T
is ϕℓ -invariant. The key observation that we use, which we think is of independent
interest, is that any ϕℓ -invariant such tree T induces a graph of groups Gϕℓ zT with
infinite cyclic edge groups such that π1 pGϕℓ zT q » Gϕℓ . Call such a graph of groups
decomposition a Gϕℓ -cyclic splitting. Conversely, any such Gϕℓ -cyclic splitting induces
a ϕℓ -invariant G-tree with trivial edge groups. Thus, we are reduced to understand
the possible graph of groups decomposition Gϕℓ zT with infinite cyclic edge groups. This
observation was used for instance by Dahmani [Dah2] to solve the conjugacy problem for
outer automorphisms ϕ of FN whose induced suspension Gϕ is Gromov hyperbolic. This
idea was also suggested by Mutanguha [Mut] to show that being polynomially growing
among free-by-cyclic groups is a geometric invariant.
    The advantage of this point of view is that we can invoke the theory of JSJ decom-
positions of groups introduced by Rips–Sela [RS] to understand all cyclic splittings of a
given finitely presented one-ended group. This theory, combined with the construction of
tree of cylinders introduced by Guirardel–Levitt [GL4], produces an AutpGϕℓ q-invariant
Gϕℓ -tree U which encodes all Gϕℓ -cyclic splittings. Even though U does not necessarily
have cyclic edge stabilisers, the fact that it is AutpGϕℓ q-invariant is sufficient for our
considerations. Indeed, the group Gϕℓ is a normal subgroup of Gϕ , so that Gϕ acts on

                                              5
U and hence U can be seen as a ϕ-invariant G-tree. As U encodes all ϕ-periodic G-trees
T with trivial edge stabilisers, it therefore suffices to understand the action of ϕ on U
and its vertex stabilisers to show that ϕ must preserve T and F. We insist on the fact
that this is the only place where we need the assumption that G is finitely presented so
as to apply Rips–Sela theory.
    We end this introduction with an open question. Our main application of Theo-
rem 1.2 deals with toral relatively hyperbolic groups as we manage to prove that they
satisfy the Standing Assumptions. However, the Standing Assumptions are quite flexible
and we hope that they are satisfied by larger classes of groups. We in particular ask the
following.

Questions 1.3. (1) Let Γ be a finite simple graph. Does the associated Right Angled
     Artin group AΓ satisfy the Standing Assumptions?

 (2) Is the kernel IApAΓ , 3q of the action of OutpAΓ q on H1 pAΓ , Z{3Zq an aperiodic
     finite index subgroup?

   There are evidence towards a positive answer for Question 1.3. Firstly, the group
IApAΓ , 3q is torsion free (in fact of type F) by a result of Day–Wade ([DW, Theorem B]).
Secondly, Fioravanti [Fio] recently proved how to construct canonical (JSJ) trees for
subgroups of OutpAΓ q that are close in spirit to the trees we use in this paper. We hope
that these trees may be useful to prove that AΓ satisfies the Standing Assumptions.
    We now explain the structure of the paper. In Section 2, we present the relevant
background regarding free factor systems, splittings of groups, JSJ decompositions of
groups or relative train tracks. In Section 3, we describe the Standing Assumptions
and prove first immediate properties of the group IApG, G, 3q, such as being torsion
free (see Proposition 3.11). In Section 4, we prove Theorem 4.1, which implies that,
if ϕ P IApG, G, 3q, every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class of elements of G is fixed by ϕ.
Section 5 is devoted to the proof of Theorem 5.1, which implies that every ϕ-periodic
conjugacy class of free factors of G is fixed by ϕ. This in particular concludes the proof
of Theorem 1.2. Finally, in Section 6, we explain how to deduce the case where G is
a toral relatively hyperbolic group (Theorem 1.1) from Theorem 1.2. We in particular
show that any toral relatively hyperbolic group satisfies the Standing Assumptions.

Acknowledgements
I warmly thank Naomi Andrew, Camille Horbez, Sam Hughes, Gilbert Levitt and Ric
Wade for helpful conversations. I also thank the LABEX MILYON (ANR-10-LABX-
0070) for its financial support during my postdoctoral position; during which part of
this project was written.

Dedication
I dedicate this paper to my grand-father, Jean-Jacques Lesage.


                                            6
2      Background
2.1     Free products, Free factor systems
Let N P N, let G1 , . . . , Gk be finitely generated groups and let

                                         G “ G1 ˚ . . . ˚ Gk ˚ FN

be the corresponding free product, where FN is a free group of rank N . Let G “
trG1 s, . . . , rGk su, where r.s denotes the G-conjugacy class. The Grushko rank of pG, Gq
is ξpG, Gq “ k ` N .
Definition 2.1 (Free factor system, free factor). A pG, Gq-free factor system is a finite set
F “ trH1 s, . . . , rHn su of conjugacy classes of subgroups of G such that:
      • for every i P t1, . . . , ku, there exists j P t1, . . . , nu such that Gi Ď Hj ;

      • there exists a (necessarily free) subgroup B of G such that

                                            G “ H1 ˚ . . . ˚ Hn ˚ B.

A pG, Gq-free factor system F is proper if F ‰ trGsu.
    A pG, Gq-free factor is a subgroup of G whose conjugacy class is contained in some
pG, Gq-free factor system.
   If F is a pG, Gq-free factor system, then the pair pG, F q is also a free product, so
that ξpG, Fq is well-defined. The set FFpG, Gq of proper pG, Gq-free factor systems is
equipped with a poset structure, where F1 Ď F2 if, for every rAs P F1 , there exists
rBs P F2 with A Ď B. Note that, in that case, ξpG, F2 q ď ξpG, F1 q, so that

                                    ξ:     FFpG, Gq Ñ     N
                                              F     ÞÑ ξpG, F q

is an order-reversing poset map.
    A pG, Gq-free factor system F is sporadic if ξpG, F q ď 2. This happens exactly in
the following cases:

      • F “ trGsu;

      • F “ trH1 s, rH2 su and G “ H1 ˚ H2 ;

      • F “ trHsu and G “ H ˚ Z.

   Let F be a pG, Gq-free factor system. We denote by AutpG, Fq the subgroup of
AutpGq which preserves F. Note that an element of AutpG, Fq may permute the ele-
ments of F. The group InnpGq of inner automorphisms of G is contained in AutpG, Fq.
The group OutpG, Fq of outer automorphisms of G preserving F is the quotient group
AutpG, Fq{InnpGq.

                                                    7
    More generally, let H be a finite set of conjugacy classes of subgroups of G. We denote
by OutpG, Hq the subgroup of OutpGq which preserves the set H. Let OutpG, Hptq q be
the subgroup of OutpG, Hq consisting of all ϕ P OutpG, Hq such that, for every rHs P H,
there exists Φ P ϕ with ΦpHq “ H and Φ|H “ IdH .

    Let H be a subgroup of G. The group H is pG, Gq-peripheral if it is contained in a
conjugate of some Gi and is pG, Gq-nonperipheral otherwise.
    Assume additionally that H is finitely generated. If X is a subset of H, we denote by
rXsH the H-conjugacy class of X. Any pG, Gq-free factor system F induces a free factor
system F|H of H by considering, for every A Ď G with rAs P F , the H-conjugacy class
rH X AsH . We remark that it is possible that there exist A, B Ď G with rAs “ rBs P F
but rH X AsH and rH X BsH induce distinct elements of F|H . The free factor system
F|H turns H into a free product pH, F|H q.

2.2     Splittings of a group
Let Γ be a finitely generated group (not necessarily a free product). Let A be a nonempty
family of subgroups closed under conjugation and passing to subgroups. A pΓ; Aq-
splitting is a Γ-equivariant isometry class of an action of Γ by isometry on a simplicial
tree T such that:

      • Edge stabilisers belong to A;

      • Γ does not preserve any proper subtree of T (we say that the action is minimal );

      • there does not exist g P Γ which preserves an edge of T while flipping its endpoints.

    We denote by V T the set of vertices of T and by ET the set of (unoriented) edges
of T . If v P V T (resp. e P ET ), we denote by Γv (resp. Γe ) the stabiliser of v (resp.
e) in Γ. A pΓ; Aq-splitting T is degenerate if T is reduced to a point. Let v P V T with
Γv finitely generated. If Γ is equipped with a free product structure pΓ, Gq and if F is a
pΓ, Gq-free factor system, we will denote by Fv the free factor system F|Γv of Γv .
    We will also need relative versions of splittings. Let H1 , . . . , Hn Ď Γ be finitely
generated subgroups and let H “ trH1 s, . . . , rHn su. A pΓ, H; Aq-splitting is a pΓ; Aq-
splitting T such that, for every i P t1, . . . , nu, the group Hi fixes a point in T .
    We will mostly work with the following classes of splittings.

Definition 2.2 (free, cyclic splittings). Let Γ be a finitely generated group, let H1 , . . . , Hn
be finitely generated subgroups of Γ and let H “ trH1 s, . . . , rHn su.

      • A pΓ, Hq-splitting is a pΓ, H; Aq-splitting where A is the family of all subgroups of
        Γ.

      • A pΓ, Hq-free splitting is a pΓ, H; Aq-splitting where A is the family consisting only
        of the trivial group.


                                                8
   • A pΓ, Hq-cyclic splitting is a pΓ, H; Aq-splitting where A is the family of all cyclic
     (possibly trivial) subgroups of Γ.
   A pΓ, Hq-free splitting is in particular a pΓ, Hq-cyclic splitting. When H “ ∅, we will
usually refer to a pΓ, Hq-splitting simply as a Γ-splitting.
   The group AutpΓq acts on the set of Γ-splittings by precomposition of the action.
Since InnpΓq acts trivially on this set (recall that a splitting is defined up to Γ-equivariant
isometry), the AutpΓq-action induces an action of OutpΓq on the set of Γ-splittings.
   Let S be a Γ-splitting. We now describe the stabiliser StabpSq of S in OutpΓq. This
description is due to Levitt [Lev].
   Note that, since Γ is finitely generated and since the action of Γ on S is minimal, the
quotient ΓzS has the structure of a finite graph of groups. The group StabpSq acts by
graph automorphism on the underlying graph ΓzS of ΓzS. This gives a homomorphism

                                  StabpSq Ñ Autgr pΓzSq,

where Autgr pΓzSq is the group of graph automorphisms of ΓzS. Since ΓzS is a finite
graph, the kernel KpSq of the above map is a finite index subgroup of StabpSq.
    Let ϕ P KpSq and let v P V S. Any representative of ϕ induces a unique Γ-equivariant
isometry of S. If Φ1 , Φ2 are two representatives of ϕ which fix the vertex v, then they
differ by an inner automorphism adg with g P Γv . This shows that, to any outer auto-
morphism ϕ P KpSq, one can naturally associate an outer automorphism ϕv P OutpΓv q.
Similarly, for every edge e P ES and every ϕ P KpSq, one can naturally associate an
outer automorphism ϕe P OutpΓe q. We thus have a natural restriction homomorphism
                                          ź
                                KpSq Ñ          OutpΓv q,
                                           vPV ΓzS

whose kernel is denoted by T pSq.
   The following proposition describes the structure of T pSq when S is a Γ-free splitting.
Proposition 2.3 ([Lev, Proposition 3.1]). Let S be a Γ-free splitting. The group T pSq is
isomorphic to a direct product      ź
                                          Γnv v {ZpΓv q,
                                     vPV ΓzS

where nv is the valence of the vertex v of ΓzS and ZpΓv q embeds diagonally in Γnv v .
   When S is a Γ-free splitting, we also have another description of the group KpSq.
Proposition 2.4 ([Lev, Proposition 4.2]). Let S be a Γ-free splitting. The group KpSq
splits as a direct product                  ź
                                  KpSq “         Mv
                                               vPV ΓzS

where, for every v P V ΓzS, there exists nv ě 1 such that the group Mv fits in a short
exact sequence
                          1 Ñ Γnv v ´1 Ñ Mv Ñ AutpΓv q Ñ 1.

                                               9
2.3     JSJ decompositions of finitely presented groups and trees of cylinders
Let Γ be a finitely presented group. Let H1 , . . . , Hn Ď Γ be finitely generated subgroups
and let H “ trH1 s, . . . , rHn su. In this section, we define the notion of a JSJ decomposition
of Γ relative to H. JSJ decompositions of groups are Γ-splittings which have been
introduced by Sela [Sel] for hyperbolic groups and greatly generalised afterwards [RS,
Bow1, DS, FP]. Here we present the point of view due to Guirardel–Levitt [GL1].
    We will give two constructions of JSJ decompositions. One is general and does not
require any other assumption on Γ. The second one requires that Γ is hyperbolic relative
to a finite set of finitely generated subgroups. The advantage of the second construction
is that the JSJ decomposition is invariant under every automorphism of Γ preserving
the parabolic structure. Moreover, as explained below (see Theorem 2.13), we have a
better understanding of the action of AutpΓq on the so-called rigid vertices of the JSJ
decomposition.

2.3.1    On the terminology of JSJ decompositions of groups
Let A be a family of subgroups of Γ, closed under taking subgroups and conjugation.
Definition 2.5 (Universally elliptic splitting). Let S be a pΓ, H; Aq-splitting. We say that
S is universally elliptic if, for every e P ES, the group Γe is elliptic in every pΓ, H; Aq-
splitting.
Definition 2.6 (Rigid, flexible vertex). Let S be a pΓ, H; Aq-splitting. Let v P V S. We
say that v is a rigid vertex if Γv is elliptic in every pΓ, H; Aq-splitting. Otherwise, we
say that v is a flexible vertex.
   Let Σ be a connected, compact, hyperbolic (not necessarily orientable) surface. A
boundary subgroup of Σ is a subgroup of π1 pΣq conjugate to the fundamental group
B “ π1 pCq of a boundary component of Σ.
Definition 2.7 (QH vertex, mapping class group). Let S be a pΓ, H; Aq-splitting. Let
v P V S. We say that v is a QH vertex if there exists a connected, compact, hyperbolic
(not necessarily orientable) surface Σv such that the following hold.
      • The group Γv is isomorphic to π1 pΣv q.

      • For every e P ES adjacent to v, the group Γe is contained in a boundary subgroup
        of Σv .

      • If rHs P H is such that H X Γv ‰ t1u, then H X Γv is contained in a boundary
        subgroup of Σv .
   The mapping class group of Γv , denoted by MCGpΓv q, is the subgroup of OutpΓv q
preserving the set of conjugacy classes of boundary subgroups of Σv .
    Note that, if v is a QH vertex of a splitting S and if S is not reduced to a point, then
Γv is infinitely-ended since BΣv ‰ ∅.

                                              10
2.3.2   JSJ splittings, tree of cylinders
Recall that Γ is one-ended relative to H if there does not exist a nondegenerate pΓ, Hq-
splitting with finite edge stabilisers.
Theorem 2.8 ([GL1, Theorems 2.20, 6.2]). Let Γ be a torsion free finitely presented group
and let H be a finite set of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups of Γ. Suppose
that Γ is one-ended relative to H. There exists a pΓ, Hq-cyclic splitting TJSJ  H    with the
following properties.
               H
 (1) The tree TJSJ is universally elliptic.
                          H
 (2) Edge stabilisers of TJSJ are infinite cyclic.
                            H
 (3) Vertex stabilisers of TJSJ are elliptic in every universally elliptic splitting.
               H , one of the following hold.
 (4) If v P V TJSJ
        (a) The group Γv is infinite cyclic.
                                                                                      H
        (b) The vertex v is QH. In particular, its stabiliser is infinitely ended if TJSJ is
            not reduced to a point.
        (c) The vertex v is rigid.
                  H
    A splitting TJSJ   given by Theorem 2.8 is called a JSJ pΓ, Hq-splitting. In general,
a JSJ pΓ, Hq-splitting is not unique. However, if T and T 1 are two distinct JSJ pΓ, Hq-
splittings, they have the same tree of cylinders, as defined by Guirardel–Levitt [GL4]. Let
T be a Γ-cyclic splitting. Let E be the equivalence relation on the edges of T generated
by e „ e1 if and only if Γe and Γe1 have a common finite index subgroup. The equivalence
relation E is an admissible relation in the sense of [GL4, Definition 3.1]. A cylinder of
T is a subforest of T consisting of all the edges in a given equivalence class. By [GL4,
Lemma 4.1], a cylinder is a subtree of T .
Definition 2.9 (Tree of cylinders). Let T be a Γ-cyclic splitting. The tree of cylinders Tc
of T is the bipartite tree V Tc “ V0 > V1 defined as follows:
 (1) there is one vertex in V0 for every vertex of T which is not contained in at most
     one cylinder;
 (2) there is one vertex in V1 for every cylinder of T ;
 (3) there exists an edge px, Cq between x P V0 and C P V1 if and only if x (considered
     as a vertex of T ) is contained in C (considered as a subtree of T ).
    The tree of cylinders of a Γ-cyclic splitting is naturally equipped with a Γ-action,
which turns it into a Γ-splitting. However, beware that, in general, the tree of cylinders
of a Γ-cyclic splitting is not necessarily a Γ-cyclic splitting. Indeed, edge stabilisers of a
tree of cylinders are not necessarily cyclic.
    The advantage of working with trees of cylinders instead of the JSJ Γ-splittings comes
from the fact that it is canonical in the following sense.

                                               11
Proposition 2.10 ([GL4, Corollary 4.10]). Let Γ be a finitely presented torsion free group
and let H be a finite set of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups of Γ. Suppose
that Γ is one-ended relative to H.
    If T1 and T2 are two JSJ pΓ, Hq-splittings, their trees of cylinders are Γ-equivariantly
isomorphic. In particular, if T is a JSJ pΓ, Hq-splitting, then its tree of cylinders Tc is
AutpΓ, Hq-invariant.
   Let T1 , T2 be two Γ-splittings. We say that T1 collapes onto T2 if T2 is obtained from
T1 by collapsing some orbits of edges. In that case, we say that T1 is a refinement of T2 .
Two trees T1 and T2 are compatible if they have a common refinement. The following
lemma shows that the tree of cylinders of a JSJ Γ-splitting is compatible with every
Γ-cyclic splitting.
Lemma 2.11. Let Γ be a finitely presented torsion free group and let H be a finite set
of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups of Γ. Suppose that Γ is one-ended
relative to H and let T be a JSJ pΓ, Hq-splitting.
    Then the tree of cylinders Tc of T is compatible with every pΓ, Hq-cyclic splitting.
Moreover, if all vertex stabilisers of T are rigid, a common refinement is obtained by
equivariantly blowing-up trees at vertices of Tc corresponding to cylinder subtrees of T .
Proof. The first assertion follows from [GL4, Corollary 8.4]. Even though the statement
only covers the case H “ ∅, the proof is identical in the relative setting.
   If all vertex stabilisers of T are rigid, then, in the language of Guirardel–Levitt, T
dominates every pΓ, Hq-cyclic splitting. Therefore, the last assertion follows from the
construction of the compatible tree in the proof of [GL4, Proposition 8.1].

2.3.3   The relatively hyperbolic construction
Recall the definition of a relatively hyperbolic group from for instance [Bow2]. Let
Γ be a finitely presented torsion free group. Suppose that Γ is hyperbolic relative to
a set P “ trP1 s, . . . , rPk su of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups. Let
H1 , . . . , Hn Ď Γ be finitely generated subgroups and let H “ trH1 s, . . . , rHn su.
Definition 2.12 (Elementary subgroups, splittings). (1) A subgroup of Γ is elementary
      if it is cyclic or conjugate into one of the groups Pi with i P t1, . . . , ku.
 (2) A pΓ, P YHq-elementary splitting is a pΓ, P YH; Aq-splitting, where A is the family
     of elementary subgroups.
    The advantage of working with relatively hyperbolic groups is that one can construct
a canonical elementary splitting, as explained in the following theorem. Recall that a
Γ-splitting S is K-acylindrical for some K ą 0 if the Γ-stabiliser of any arc in S of length
at least K ` 1 is finite.
Theorem 2.13 ([GL2, GL1]). Let Γ be a torsion free finitely generated hyperbolic group
relative to P and let H be a finite set of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups
of Γ. Suppose that Γ is one-ended relative to P YH. There exists a pΓ, P YHq-elementary
splitting TPYH with the following properties.

                                            12
 (1) [GL1, Theorem 9.18] Edge stabilisers are infinite elementary. Moreover, every edge
     has one endpoint with elementary stabiliser and one endpoint with nonelementary
     stabiliser.

 (2) [GL4, Proposition 5.13] The action of Γ on TPYH is 2-acylindrical.

 (3) Any elementary subgroup fixes at most one vertex with elementary stabiliser.

 (4) [GL2, Lemma 3.7] Edge and vertex stabilisers are finitely generated.

 (5) [GL1, Theorem 9.18] If v P V TPYH , one of the following hold:

      (a) the group Γv is two-ended;
      (b) the conjugacy class of Γv is contained in P;
      (c) the vertex v is nonelementary and QH;
      (d) the vertex v is nonelementary and rigid.

 (6) [GL1, Theorem 9.18] The group AutpΓ, P, Hq of automorphisms preserving P and
     H preserves the Γ-equivariant isometry class of TPYH .

 (7) [GL2, Proposition 4.1] For every edge e P ETPYH , the image

                           KpTPYH q X OutpΓ, P, Hptq q Ñ OutpΓe q

     is finite.

 (8) [GL2, Proposition 4.1] For every rigid vertex v P V TPYH , the image

                           KpTPYH q X OutpΓ, P, Hptq q Ñ OutpΓv q

     is finite.

 (9) [GL2, Proposition 4.1] For every QH vertex v P V TPYH , the image KpTPYH q Ñ
     OutpΓv q is contained in MCGpΓv q.

    The splitting TPYH given by Theorem 2.13 is called the JSJ pΓ, P Y Hq-elementary
splitting.

Remark 2.14. Theorem 2.13p3q follows from the following facts. First, the tree TPYH is
a tree of cylinders for the equivalence relation of coelementarity [GL4, Proposition 6.1].
Moreover, vertices of TPYH with elementary stabilisers correspond to vertices associated
with cylinders. Finally, any elementary subgroup preserves at most one cylinder.

Remark 2.15. If v P V TPYH is a QH vertex such that Σv is isomorphic to a three-
punctured sphere, then MCGpΓv q is finite. This is why, in the rest of the paper, we
will assume that, if v P V TPYH is a QH vertex such that Σv is isomorphic to a three-
punctured sphere, then v is a rigid vertex. This is coherent with Theorem 2.13p8q and
the assumptions of Guirardel–Levitt in [GL2, Remark 3.6].

                                           13
      We record an immediate consequence of Theorem 2.13.

Lemma 2.16. Let Γ be a torsion free finitely generated hyperbolic group relative to P and
let H be a finite set of finitely generated subgroups of Γ. Suppose that Γ is one-ended
relative to P Y H.
    Let H be a subgroup of Γ which fixes a point in TPYH . Then H fixes a unique
elementary vertex of TPYH or a unique nonelementary vertex of TPYH .

Proof. This follows from the fact that the action of Γ on TPYH is 2-acylindrical (Theo-
rem 2.13p2q) together with the fact that every edge has an elementary endpoint and a
nonelementary endpoint (Theorem 2.13p1q).

2.4    The outer space of a free product
Let pG, Gq be a free product of groups. In this section, following Guirardel–Levitt [GL3]
(see [CV] for the case pG, Gq “ pFN , ∅q), we define a simplicial graph on which OutpG, Gq
acts cocompactly, called the spine of outer space of pG, Gq. An important property that
we will use is that any finite subgroup of OutpG, Gq fixes a point in it.

Definition 2.17 (Grushko free splitting). A Grushko pG, Gq-free splitting is a pG, Gq-free
splitting T such that, for every v P V T , either Gv is trivial or rGv s P G.

Definition 2.18 ([GL3, Spine of outer space]). Let pG, Gq be a free product. The spine of
outer space of pG, Gq, denoted by OpG, Gq, is the graph whose vertices are the Grushko
pG, Gq-free splittings, two such splittings S and T being adjacent if S collapses onto T
or conversely.

    The group AutpG, Gq acts on OpG, Gq by precomposition of the action. Since the
group InnpGq acts trivially on OpG, Gq, this action passes to the quotient to give an
action of OutpG, Gq on OpG, Gq.
    We now recall a theorem, due to Hensel–Kielak [HK], describing the action of finite
subgroups of OutpG, Gq on OpG, Gq.

Theorem 2.19 ([HK, Corollary 6.1]). Let pG, Gq be a free product of groups (recall that G
is finitely generated) and let H be a finite subgroup of OutpG, Gq. Then H fixes a point
of OpG, Gq.

    We will also frequently construct pG, Gq-free factor systems using Grushko pG, Gq-
free splittings, as follows. Let S be a Grushko pG, Gq-free splitting and let T be a G-
equivariant subforest of S containing every vertex with nontrivial stabiliser. The quotient
GzT is a (not necessarily connected) graph of groups, which identifies with a subgraph
of groups of GzS. Let U1 , . . . , Ut be the connected components of GzT (considered as
graphs of groups) and let FpT q “ trπ1 pUi qsuti“1 , where rπ1 pUi qs is the conjugacy class of
the fundamental group π1 pUi q seen as a subgroup of G. Since T contains every vertex
with nontrivial stabiliser, the set F pT q is a pG, Gq-free factor system. We call FpT q the
pG, Gq-free factor system induced by T .


                                              14
2.5   Double boundary of a free product and its laminations
Let pG, Gq be a free product of groups. The group G is hyperbolic relative to the set G.
Therefore, one can consider the Bowditch boundary B8 pG, Gq of pG, Gq (see [Bow2]). It
may be described as follows. Let S be a Grushko pG, Gq-free splitting. Let B8 S be the
Gromov boundary of S and let V8 pSq be the set of vertices of S with infinite valence.
Let S “ S Y B8 S, equipped with the metric topology. For two distinct points x, y P S,
the direction of x at y is the connected component of Sztyu which contains x. The
observers’ topology for S (see [CHL]) is the topology generated by the sets of directions
in S. The Bowditch boundary B8 pG, Gq of pG, Gq is the set B8 S Y V8 pSq equipped with
the observers’ topology. Its homeomorphism class does not depend on the choice of S.
    Let
                        B 2 pG, Gq “ pB8 pG, Gq ˆ B8 pG, Gqq ´ ∆{ „
be the double boundary of pG, Gq, where ∆ is the diagonal and „ is the equivalence
relation generated by the flip px, yq „ py, xq. One can geometrically see an element of
B 2 pG, Gq as follows. A point tx, yu of B 2 pG, Gq is represented by a (not necessarily finite)
unoriented geodesic path between the points of S representing x and y. For this reason,
we call an element of B 2 pG, Gq a line of pG, Gq.
     Note that the group G naturally acts on B 2 pG, Gq. A lamination of pG, Gq is a closed
G-invariant subset of B 2 pG, Gq.
     Let A be a pG, Gq-free factor. The inclusion A Ď G induces an A-equivariant inclusion
B8 pA, G|A q ãÑ B8 pG, Gq and an A-equivariant inclusion B 2 pA, G|A q ãÑ B 2 pG, Gq with
closed image. We identify B 2 pA, G|A q with its image in B 2 pG, Gq. A pG, Gq-free factor
system F induces a lamination B 2 pF, Gq of pG, Gq by looking at the union of the (disjoint)
sets gB 2 pA, G|A q with rAs P F and g P G.

2.6   Relative train track maps for free products
Let pG, Gq be a free product of groups. Let ϕ P OutpG, Gq. In this section, we recall
the construction of particular topological representatives of ϕ, called relative train tracks.
They encode several dynamical invariants of ϕ. Relative train tracks were first introduced
by Bestvina–Handel [BH] in the context of automorphisms of free groups and were then
extended to the context of free products by Collins–Turner [CT] (see also the work of
Francaviglia–Martino [FM] and Lyman [Lym2, Lym1]).
    Let T be a Grushko pG, Gq-free splitting and let Φ P AutpG, Gq. A morphism F : T Ñ
T associated with Φ is a map sending vertices to vertices, edges of S to nontrivial edge
paths and such that, for all g P G and x P T , we have

                                     F pgxq “ ΦpgqF pxq.

    Let γ be a path in T . There exists a unique geodesic in T which is homotopic to γ
relative to its endpoints. This geodesic is denoted by rγs and is called the reduced path
associated with γ.



                                              15
   A filtration of T is an increasing sequence
                                ∅ “ T0 Ď T1 Ď . . . Ď Tn “ T
of subgraphs which are both G and F -invariant. The graphs of the filtration are not
necessarily connected.
    Let r P t0, . . . , nu. The r-th stratum of T , denoted by Hr , is the closure of Tr ´ Tr´1 .
    To every stratum Hr , one can naturally associate a transition matrix Mr as follows.
The matrix Mr is a square matrix indexed by the G-orbits of unoriented edges of Hr .
Let e, e1 P EHr . Then the value at the pGe1 , Geq-entry of Mr is equal to the number of
times that the path rF peqs contains edges in Ge1 . Since F is Φ-equivariant, this does not
depend on the choice of a representative of Ge. A filtration is maximal if every transition
matrix is either irreducible or the zero matrix.
    Suppose that the transition matrix Mr is irreducible. Associated to Mr is a Perron–
Froebenius eigenvalue λr ě 1. We say that Hr is exponentially growing (EG) if λr ą 1
and nonexponentially growing (NEG) otherwise.
    Let v P V T . Recall that a direction at v is a connected component of T ztvu, or
equivalently an oriented edge whose origin is v. If d is a direction at v, then F sends d to
a direction DF pdq at F pvq. Thus, the map F induces a map DF of the set of directions
of T . A turn is an unordered pair of directions at a vertex of T . A turn td, d1 u is
degenerate if d “ d1 , it is illegal if there exists m ě 1 such that pDF qm pdq “ pDF qm pd1 q,
and is legal otherwise.
    Let γ “ e1 . . . em be an oriented geodesic edge path in T . Note that, for every
i P t1, . . . , mu, the set te´1
                              i , ei`1 u is a turn. We say that γ is a legal path if, for every
i P t1, . . . , mu, the turn te´1
                               i , ei`1 u is legal.
    Let r P t0, . . . , nu. A turn te, e1 u is of height r if e, e1 P EHr . A geodesic edge path
γ is r-legal if all its height r turns are legal.
    We can now define a relative train track map.
Definition 2.20 (Relative train track map). Let Φ P AutpG, Gq, let F : T Ñ T be a
morphism associated with Φ and let ∅ “ T0 Ď T1 Ď . . . Ď Tn “ T be a filtration. The
map F is a relative train track if the filtration is maximal and if, for every EG stratum
Hr , the following hold.
 (1) Directions in Hr are mapped by DF to directions in Hr .
 (2) If σ Ď Tr´1 is a nondegenerate geodesic edge path with endpoints in Hr , then
     rF pσqs is a nondegenerate geodesic edge path with endpoints in Hr .
 (3) If σ is an r-legal geodesic edge path, so is rF pσqs.
   We can now state the main existence theorem of relative train tracks. It appears in
several forms in the literature (see [CT], [FM, Corollary 8.25], [Lym2, Theorem A]).
Theorem 2.21 ([CT, FM, Lym2]). Let pG, Gq be a free product and let ϕ P OutpG, Gq.
There exists a relative train track map F : T Ñ T associated with an automorphism
representing ϕ. Moreover, if ϕ preserves a pG, Gq-free factor system F, one may choose
F : T Ñ T such that there exists an element Ti of the filtration of T with F pTi q “ F.

                                               16
2.7     Relatively fully irreducible outer automorphisms
Let pG, Gq be a free product and let ϕ P OutpG, Gq. We say that ϕ is fully irreducible
relative to G if, for every n ą 0, the outer automorphism ϕn does not preserve any proper
pG, Gq-free factor system distinct from G. The main property we will use regarding fully
irreducible outer automorphisms is the existence of an R-tree equipped with a pG, Gq-
action obtained as a limit of iterates of a relative train track.

Theorem 2.22 ([FMS]). Let pG, Gq be a nonsporadic free product, let ϕ P OutpG, Gq be
fully irreducible relative to G and let F : T Ñ T be a relative train track representative
of ϕ. There exist λ ą 1 and an R-tree Xϕ equipped with an action of G by isometries
such that
                                                1
                                    Xϕ “ lim n ϕn T.
                                           nÑ8 λ

    The tree Xϕ does not depend on the choice of the relative train track map F : T Ñ T
and has the following properties.

    (1) Arc stabilisers in Xϕ are trivial.

    (2) There exists a (possibly trivial) cyclic subgroup H Ď G such that the set of conju-
        gacy classes of point stabilisers in Xϕ is exactly G Y trHsu.

Remark 2.23. The existence of Xϕ follows from [FMS, Lemma 2.14.1]. The fact that
it does not depend on the relative train track map follows from [FMS, Theorem 5.1.1].
The description of the action of G on Xϕ follows for instance from the fact that Xϕ is
arational (see [GH2, Theorems 3.4, 4.1]).


3      First properties of congruence subgroups
Let pG, Gq be a free product of groups with G “ G1 ˚ . . . ˚ Gk ˚ FN . We now describe
the finite index subgroup of OutpG, Gq which will be of central interest in the rest of the
paper.
    The group OutpG, Gq naturally permutes the conjugacy classes in G. The kernel of
this action is a finite index subgroup, denoted by Out0 pG, Gq. We now pass to a further
finite index subgroup using the action on homology. The group Out0 pG, Gq naturally
acts on the finite group H1 pG, Z{3Zq. We denote the kernel of this action by IA0 pG, G, 3q.
We record in this section the first immediate aperiodicity properties of IA0 pG, G, 3q.
    We start with some standard lemmas regarding the homology of a graph of groups.
If S is a splitting of a group G, recall the definition of KpSq from Section 2.2.

Lemma 3.1. Let G be a finitely generated group, let A be a trivial G-module and let X be
the graph of groups associated with a G-splitting S. Let v P X and let Incv be the set of
Gv -conjugacy classes of edge groups associated with oriented edges of X with origin v.
    Let H be the image of H1 pGv , Aq in H1 pG, Aq and let KIncv be the subgroup of
H1 pGv , Aq generated by the images of H1 pGe , Aq with rGe sGv P Incv in H1 pGv , Aq.

                                             17
   There exists a subgroup K Ď KIncv such that H fits in an exact sequence

                                         K Ñ H1 pGv , Aq Ñ H.                                           (1)

Moreover, for every ϕ P KpSq, the sequence in Equation (1) is ϕ-equivariant.
Proof. We denote by EX  ⃗ the set of oriented edges of X. For every w P V X (resp. e P EX),
                                                                                       ⃗
let pXw , ˚w q (resp. pXe , ˚e q) be a pointed CW complex with contractible universal cover
whose fundamental group is isomorphic to Gw (resp. Ge ). We additionally assume that,
for every e P EX⃗ with origin w, there exists an embedding ιw,e : Xe ãÑ Xw and a path
pe between ˚w and ιw,e p˚e q so that the map ιw,e induces via pe an embedding Ge ãÑ Gw .
Let                                ¨                           ˛
                                       ž        ž
                            XG “ ˝         Xw >     Xe ˆ r0, 1s‚{ „
                                      wPV X            ⃗
                                                     ePEX

                     ⃗ with origin w1 and terminal vertex w2 , Xe ˆ r0, 1s is identified
where, for every e P EX
with Xe´1 ˆ r0, 1s equipped with the reverse orientation and the subspaces Xe ˆ t0u and
Xe ˆ t1u are glued to Xw1 and Xw2 via ιw1 ,e and ιw2 ,e . Then π1 pXG q is isomorphic to G
and its universal cover is contractible.
   Let U be the open subset of XG which is the image of
                                         „   ˙                         „      ˙
                        ž                  3             ž                  1
           Xv >                   Xe ˆ 0,      >                 Xe ˆ 0,        .
                                           4                                3
                      ⃗
                    ePEX,opeq“v,tpeq‰v                        ⃗
                                                            ePEX,opeq“tpeq“v

Let V be the open subset of XG which is the image of
                                                                                        „       ˙
           ž                     ž                                     ž                    3
                    Xw >                      Xe ˆ r0, 1s >                         Xe ˆ 0,         >
                                                                                            4
        wPV X,w‰v            ⃗
                           ePEX,opeq,tpeq‰v                      ⃗
                                                               ePEX,tpeq“v,opeq‰v
                                                     ˆ         ˙
                                 ž                       1 3
                                              Xe ˆ        ,        .
                                                         4 4
                             ⃗
                           ePEX,opeq“tpeq“v

Then U Y V covers XG . Thus, we can apply the Mayer Vietoris exact sequence to the
triple pXG , U, V q, that is, the following sequence is exact

                     H1 pU X V, Aq Ñ H1 pU, Aq ‘ H1 pV, Aq Ñ H1 pG, Aq.                                 (2)
   The subset U deformation retracts to Xv , so that H1 pU, Aq “ H1 pGv , Aq and the
image
   š of H1 pU, Aq in H1 pG, Aq is H. Moreover, the subset À    U X V deformation retracts
to ePEX,opeq“v
       ⃗         X e , so that H 1 pU X V, Aq is isomorphic to     ⃗
                                                                 ePEX,opeq“v H1 pGe , Aq and
the image of H1 pU X V, Aq in H1 pGv , Aq is exactly KIncv . Thus, Equation (1) follows
from Equation (2) and the above descriptions of H1 pU, Aq and H1 pU X V, Aq.
   Let ϕ P KpSq. Then ϕ induces a homotopy equivalence ϕXG of XG . Since ϕ P KpSq,
ϕ acts trivially on the graph X. Thus, ϕXG preserves (up to homotopy) the subsets U
and V . This shows that the exact sequence in Equation (2) is ϕXG -equivariant and the
exact sequence in Equation (1) is ϕ-equivariant.

                                                    18
Lemma 3.2. Let F be a pG, Gq-free factor system and let rAs P F .
   • The group H1 pA, Z{3Zq embeds as a direct summand of H1 pG, Z{3Zq.
   • For every rBs P F distinct from rAs, the inclusion A˚B Ď G induces an embedding
     H1 pA, Z{3Zq ‘ H1 pB, Z{3Zq ãÑ H1 pG, Z{3Zq.
   • If, for all g P G and rGi s P G, the group gGi g ´1 is not contained in A, then
     H1 pA, Z{3Zq is a nontrivial direct summand of H1 pG, Z{3Zq.
Proof. Let rBs P F ´ trAsu, let C Ď G be such that G “ A ˚ C and let D Ď G be such
that G “ A ˚ B ˚ D. The fact that H1 pA, Z{3Zq ‘ H1 pB, Z{3Zq is a direct summand of
H1 pG, Z{3Zq follows from the fact that A ˚ B is a free factor of G and Lemma 3.1 applied
with X induced by G “ A ˚ B ˚ D. This proves the first two assertions of the lemma.
    Suppose now that for all g P G and rGi s P G, the group gGi g ´1 is not contained in A.
We now prove that H1 pA, Z{3Zq is nontrivial. By assumption on A, for every rGi s P G,
some conjugate of Gi is contained in C. Since G “ G1 ˚ . . . ˚ Gk ˚ FN , we may assume,
up to changing the representative FN , that A Ď FN is a nontrivial free factor of FN .
Thus, we have H1 pA, Z{3Zq ‰ t0u.

Lemma 3.3. Let ϕ P IA0 pG, G, 3q. Let F be a ϕ-invariant pG, Gq-free factor system. Then
every element of F is fixed by ϕ.
Proof. Let rAs P F . Suppose first that there exists i P t1, . . . , ku such that Gi Ď A. Then
for every rBs P F distinct from rAs, we have Gi X B “ t1u. Thus, since ϕ P Out0 pG, Gq,
we have ϕprAsq “ rAs.
    Suppose now that, for all i P t1, . . . , ku and all g P G, we have A X gGi g ´1 “ t1u.
By Lemma 3.2, the group H1 pA, Z{3Zq is a nontrivial direct summand of H1 pG, Z{3Zq.
Moreover, for every rBs P F distinct from rAs, the image of H1 pB, Z{3Zq in H1 pG, Z{3Zq
is distinct from H1 pA, Z{3Zq. As ϕ acts trivially on H1 pG, Z{3Zq, we see that ϕprAsq “
rAs.

Lemma 3.4. Let ϕ P IA0 pG, G, 3q and let A be a pG, Gq-free factor whose conjugacy class
is ϕ-invariant. The image ϕ|A of ϕ in OutpAq is contained in IA0 pA, G|A , 3q.
Proof. Since A is a pG, Gq-free factor, for every rHsA P G|A , there exists a unique rGi s P G
such that rHs “ rGi s. In particular, since ϕ P Out0 pG, Gq, the image of ϕ is contained
in Out0 pA, G|A q.
    By Lemma 3.2, since A is a pG, Gq-free factor, the image of A in H1 pG, Z{3Zq is a
direct factor F preserved by ϕ. As ϕ acts trivially on H1 pG, Z{3Zq, we see that ϕ also
acts trivially on F , so that ϕ|A P IA0 pA, G|A , 3q.

   The next lemma gives a useful criterion to show that the automorphism of a finite
graph is trivial.
Lemma 3.5 ([Iva, Lemma 1.1]). Let X be a finite connected graph and let f : X Ñ X be
a graph automorphism. Suppose that f fixes every leaf of X and that the action of f on
H1 pX, Z{3Zq is trivial. Then one of the following holds.

                                             19
   • The graph X is homeomorphic to a circle and f acts on X as a rotation.

   • The map f is the identity.

Lemma 3.6. Let G be a group, let S be a G-splitting and let ϕ P OutpGq be an outer
automorphism preserving S. If ϕ acts trivially on H1 pG, Z{3Zq, then ϕ acts trivially on
H1 pGzS, Z{3Zq.

Proof. Let ϕgr be the graph automorphism of GzS induced by ϕ. Denote by ϕ˚ (resp.
ϕgr˚ ) the action on H1 pG, Z{3Zq (resp. H1 pGzS, Z{3Zq) induced by ϕ (resp. ϕgr ).
Since G is the fundamental group of the graph of groups GzS, there exists a natural
surjective homomorphism G Ñ π1 pGzSq inducing in turn a surjection p : H1 pG, Z{3Zq Ñ
H1 pGzS, Z{3Zq. The following diagram is commutative:

                                             ϕ˚
                           H1 pG, Z{3Zq             H1 pG, Z{3Zq
                                p                          p
                                            ϕgr˚
                          H1 pGzS, Z{3Zq           H1 pGzS, Z{3Zq.

Since p is surjective and ϕ˚ is trivial, the map ϕgr˚ is also trivial.

Lemma 3.7. Let ϕ P IA0 pG, G, 3q. Let S be a ϕ-invariant pG, Gq-free splitting.

 (1) The graph automorphism of GzS induced by ϕ is trivial.

 (2) For every v P V S, the image of the natural homomorphism xϕy Ñ OutpGv q is
     contained in IA0 pGv , Gv , 3q.

Proof. We may assume that S is nondegenerate as otherwise there is nothing to prove.
    We prove the first assertion. By Lemma 3.6, the action of ϕ on H1 pGzS, Z{3Zq is
trivial. Thus, in order to apply Lemma 3.5, it suffices to prove that ϕ fixes every leaf of
GzS. Note that ϕ preserves the pG, Gq-free factor system induced by the set of vertex
stabilisers of S. In particular, by Lemma 3.3, the outer automorphism ϕ fixes pointwise
the set of vertices of GzS with nontrivial vertex stabiliser. Since every leaf of GzS has
nontrivial stabiliser by minimality of S, we see that ϕ fixes every leaf of GzS. Thus, by
Lemma 3.5, if GzS is not a circle, then ϕ acts trivially on GzS.
    It remains to study the case where GzS is a circle. By Lemma 3.5, ϕ acts as a
rotation on GzS. Thus, in order to show that ϕ acts trivially on GzS, it suffices to
prove that ϕ fixes a point of GzS. If ξpG, Gq ě 2, then GzS has a vertex with nontrivial
stabiliser, and is therefore fixed by ϕ. Otherwise, as S is nondegenerate, we have G “ Z
and ϕ “ id, so that ϕ acts as the identity on GzS. This concludes the proof of the first
assertion.
    The second assertion follows from Lemma 3.4 since every nontrivial vertex stabiliser
of a pG, Gq-free splitting is a pG, Gq-free factor.




                                             20
3.1     The Standing Assumptions and the group IApG, G, 3q
In this section we construct a further finite index subgroup IApG, G, 3q of IA0 pG, G, 3q
which will satisfy the desired aperiodicity properties. The construction of IApG, G, 3q
relies on further assumptions on G which we call the Standing Assumptions. These as-
sumptions will be used in the rest of the paper. We first recall some standard definitions.
    Let ϕ P OutpG, Gq. A periodic subgroup of ϕ is a subgroup H Ď G such that there
exist ℓ ą 0 and Ψ P ϕℓ with ΨpHq “ H and Ψ|H “ idH . If Φ P ϕ, let

                      PerpΦq “ tg P G | Dℓ ą 0 such that Φℓ pgq “ gu

be the periodic subgroup of Φ.

Standing Assumptions.         Let G be a finitely presented torsion free group, let G “
G1 ˚ . . . ˚ Gk ˚ FN be the Grushko decomposition of G and let G “ trG1 s, . . . , rGk su. Let
                                                    k
                                                    ź
                                    0
                               p : IA pG, G, 3q Ñ         OutpGi q
                                                    i“1

be the natural restriction homomorphism.
    Suppose that, for every i P t1, . . . , ku, there exists a subgroup Out˚ pGi q of OutpGi q
with the following properties.

 (1) The group Out˚ pGi q is a finite index subgroup of OutpGi q.
 (2) The group Out˚ pGi q is torsion free.
 (3) For every ϕ P Out˚ pGi q and every ϕ-periodic finitely generated subgroup H of ϕ,
     we have ϕ P OutpGi , rHsptq q.
  (4) Denote by Aut˚ pGi q the full preimage of Out˚ pGi q in AutpGi q. For every Φ P
      Aut˚ pGi q, every Φ-periodic element of Gi is fixed by Φ, that is PerpΦq “ FixpΦq.

    Let IApG, G, 3q be the preimage by p of ki“1 Out˚ pGi q. It is a finite index subgroup
                                            ś
of IA0 pG, G, 3q.
Remark 3.8. When G “ FN and G “ ∅, the group IApG, G, 3q is exactly the kernel of the
natural homomorphism OutpFN q Ñ GLN pZ{3Zq given by the action on H1 pFN , Z{3Zq.
      We observe immediate consequences of the Standing Assumptions.
Lemma 3.9. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q
and let A be a pG, Gq-free factor whose conjugacy class is ϕ-invariant. The image ϕ|A of
ϕ in OutpAq is contained in IApA, G|A , 3q.
Proof. By Lemma 3.4, we have ϕ|A P IA0 pA, G|A , 3q. For every rHsA P G|A , there ex-
ists a unique rGi s P G such that rHs “ rGi s. Thus, the restriction homomorphism
pH : IA0 pG, G, 3q Ñ OutpHq factors through IA0 pG, G, 3q Ñ IA0 pA, G|A , 3q. As ϕ maps
into Out˚ pHq, so does ϕ|A and we have ϕ|A P IApA, G|A , 3q.

                                             21
Lemma 3.10. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions.

    (1) For every i P t1, . . . , ku, the group Gi {ZpGi q is torsion free.

    (2) Let S be a Grushko pG, Gq-free splitting. The group T pSq is torsion free.

Proof. Let i P t1, . . . , ku. The group InnpGi q Ď IAAut pGi q is isomorphic to Gi {ZpGi q.
By Item p4q of the Standing Assumptions, the group IAAut pGi q is torsion free. Therefore,
the group Gi {ZpGi q is torsion free. This proves the first assertion.
    We now prove the second assertion. Let S be a Grushko pG, ś        Gq-free splitting. By
Proposition 2.3, the group T pSq is isomorphic to a direct product vPV GzS Gnv v {ZpGv q,
where ZpGv q embeds diagonnally. The group vPV GzS Gnv v {ZpGv q projects onto the
                                                   ś

group vPV GzS pGv {ZpGv qqnv with kernel isomorphic to vPV GzS ZpGv qnv {ZpGv q. The
       ś                                                    ś

group vPV GzS pGv {ZpGv qqnv is torsion free by Assertion p1q and the kernel is also
       ś

torsion free, being the quotient of a direct product of free abelian groups by its diagonal
subgroup (recall that G is torsion free). Hence T pSq is torsion free.

      We now check an easy aperiodicity property of IApG, G, 3q.

Proposition 3.11. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. The group
IApG, G, 3q is torsion free.

Proof. The natural homomorphism pIA : IApG, G, 3q Ñ ki“1 OutpGi q has torsion free
                                                         ś
image by Item p2q of the Standing Assumptions. Thus, it suffices to show that kerppIA q
is torsion free.
    Let H be a finite subgroup of kerppIA q. By Theorem 2.19, the group H fixes a
Grushko pG, Gq-free splitting S. By Lemma 3.7, the group H is contained in KpSq.
Since H Ď kerppIA q, the group H is contained in T pSq. By Lemma 3.10, the group T pSq
is torsion free. Hence H is trivial.


4      Periodic conjugacy classes of elements
Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. In this section we describe the
dynamics of periodic conjugacy classes of elements of G for automorphisms in IApG, G, 3q.
The aim of the section is to prove the following theorem.

Theorem 4.1. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q.
Let H be a ϕ-invariant finite set of conjugacy classes of finitely generated periodic sub-
groups of ϕ. Then ϕ P OutpG, Hptq q.

      As a corollary, we have:

Corollary 4.2. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q.
Every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class of elements of G is fixed by ϕ.



                                                 22
Proof. Let g P G whose conjugacy class is ϕ-periodic, let Φ be a representative of ϕ and
let H “ trxΦi pgqysuiPN . Then H is a ϕ-invariant finite set of conjugacy classes of finitely
generated periodic subgroups of ϕ. By Theorem 4.1, we have ϕ P OutpG, Hptq q, so that
there exists Ψ P ϕ such that Ψpxgyq “ xgy and Ψ|xgy “ Idxgy . Then Ψpgq “ g and the
G-conjugacy class of g is fixed by ϕ.

    The proof uses elementary JSJ decompositions of the relatively hyperbolic pair pG, Gq
relative to the set H. Indeed, using an inductive argument, we may assume that G is
one-ended relative to G Y H. In that case, by Theorem 2.13 (with G “ Γ and P “ G),
there exists a canonical ϕ-invariant JSJ elementary splitting TGYH . We then show that
the action of ϕ on this JSJ splitting is sufficiently simple to prove the desired result. The
proof being quite technical, we subdivide it into several subsections.

4.1   Trivial action on the quotient graph
Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions and let H be a finite set of
conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups of G such that G is one-ended relative
to G YH. The aim of this section is to prove that any outer automorphism ϕ P IApG, G, 3q
preserving H and such that H consists of periodic subgroups of ϕ acts trivially on the
graph GzTGYH (see Proposition 4.6).
    The strategy is to apply Lemma 3.5. However, in order to apply it, we need to prove
that ϕ fixes every leaf of GzTGYH . This is done in Lemma 4.4. During the proof of the
later, we will need the following result, due to Horbez.
Lemma 4.3 ([Hor1, Lemma 6.11]). Let pG, Gq be a free product and let T be a pG, Gq-
cyclic splitting whose edge stabilisers are all nontrivial. There exists v P V T such that
Gv splits as a free product relative to Gv and incident edge stabilisers.
Lemma 4.4. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Let H be a finite
set of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups of G such that G is one-ended
relative to G Y H. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q be an outer automorphism preserving H. The
graph automorphism induced by ϕ on GzTGYH fixes every leaf of GzTGYH .
Proof. We assume that TGYH is not reduced to a point as otherwise there is nothing to
prove. We first prove that ϕ fixes every leaf of GzTGYH with noncyclic stabiliser. Let v
be a leaf of GzTGYH with noncyclic stabiliser and let v be a lift of v in TGYH . Note that,
since Gv is noncyclic, by Theorem 2.13p5q, the stabiliser of v either is nonelementary or
its conjugacy class belongs to G.
    Suppose first that rGv s P G. Since the action of G on TGYH is minimal, and since v
is a leaf, we see that v is the unique point fixed by Gv . Since ϕ P Out0 pG, Gq, we deduce
that v is fixed by ϕ.
    Suppose that Gv is nonelementary. Assume first that there exists i P t1, . . . , ku such
that v is the unique fixed point of a conjugate of Gi . Since ϕ P Out0 pG, Gq, we see that
v is fixed by ϕ.
    Assume otherwise that v is not the only fixed point of a conjugate of some Gi with
i P t1, . . . , ku. We claim that |Gv | ď 1. Indeed, let e P EGzTGYH be the edge adjacent to

                                             23
v and let e P ETGYH be a lift of e adjacent to v. Since v is a leaf of GzTGYH , the group Gv
acts transitively on the set of edges adjacent to v and there exists a unique Gv -conjugacy
class of edges groups in Gv . Let rAs P G be such that A X Gv ‰ t1u. Since TGYH is a
pG, G Y Hq-elementary tree, the group A is elliptic in TGYH . By assumption, v is not the
only fixed point of A, so that, up to taking a Gv -conjugate of A, we have A X Gv Ď Ge .
Thus, for every rBsGv P Gv , there exists B 1 P rBsGv such that B 1 X Gv Ď Ge . Since Ge
is elementary, we necessarily have |Gv | ď 1. The claim follows.
    The claim implies that the free product decomposition of Gv induced by Gv is:

                                       Gv “ H ˚ Fℓ ,

where H is a (possibly trivial) subgroup of some conjugate of some Gi and Fℓ is a
nonabelian free group of rank ℓ ě 0. Since the action of G on TGYH is minimal and
since, by assumption, v is not the only fixed point of H, we have ℓ ě 1.
Claim. The group Fℓ induces a nontrivial subspace of H1 pG, Z{3Zq which is distinct
from any subspace of H1 pG, Z{3Zq induced by any other leaf group of GzTGYH .

Proof. If H is nontrivial, then the stabiliser of the edge adjacent to v is contained in H as
v is not the fixed point of a maximal parabolic subgroup. Thus, Fℓ is a pG, Gq-free factor
and the image of Fℓ in H1 pG, Z{3Zq is not contained in any subspace of H1 pG, Z{3Zq
induced by any other leaf group of GzTGYH by Lemma 3.2.
    Suppose that H is trivial. Since edge stabilisers of TGYH are elementary, the stabiliser
of the edge adjacent to v is infinite cyclic. Since Gv is nonelementary, we have ℓ ě 2.
Let U be the tree obtained from TGYH by collapsing every orbit of edges except the
one of the edge e adjacent to v. Then U is a pG, Gq-cyclic splitting. Since v is a leaf,
the splitting U induces an amalgam G » Fℓ ˚Ge Gw , for some w P V U . Let L1 be the
set of leaves of GzTGYH distinct from v. Then the image V 1 of xH1 pGv1 , Z{3Zqyv1 PL1 in
H1 pG, Z{3Zq is contained in the image of H1 pGw , Z{3Zq. Let V be a supplementary
subspace of H1 pGe , Z{3Zq in H1 pFℓ , Z{3Zq, which exists since ℓ ě 2 and Ge » Z. Then
the image of V in H1 pG, Z{3Zq is not contained in V 1 by Lemma 3.1. Therefore, the
image of Fℓ in H1 pG, Z{3Zq is not contained in any subspace of H1 pG, Z{3Zq induced by
any other leaf of GzTGYH .

    Since ϕ P IApG, G, 3q, the claim implies that v is fixed by ϕ. This shows that ϕ fixes
every leaf of GzTGYH with noncyclic stabiliser.
    It remains to prove that ϕ fixes every leaf of GzTGYH with cyclic stabiliser. Let v be
a leaf of GzTGYH with cyclic stabiliser. By Theorem 2.13p3q, every elementary subgroup
of G fixes at most one vertex of TGYH with elementary stabiliser. Thus, in order to prove
that ϕ fixes v, its suffices to prove that ϕ fixes rGv s.
    Suppose that Gv is pG, Gq-peripheral. Since ϕ P Out0 pG, Gq, there exist rGi s P G and
Φ P ϕ such that Gv Ď Gi , ΦpGi q “ Gi , and rGv sGi is a Φ|Gi -periodic conjugacy class of
a cyclic subgroup of Gi . By Item p3q of the Standing Assumptions, we see that rGv s is
fixed by Φ|Gi . Thus, the vertex v is fixed by ϕ.


                                             24
    Suppose now that Gv is pG, Gq-nonperipheral. Let L be the set of leaves v 1 of GzTGYH
with cyclic pG, Gq-nonperipheral stabiliser. Let U be the pG, Gq-cyclic splitting obtained
by collapsing every edge of GzTGYH except the ones adjacent to leaves of L. Note that
every edge of U has nontrivial infinite cyclic edge stabiliser by Theorem 2.13p1q.
    Let x be the central vertex of GzU . Then x is the unique vertex of GzU with noncyclic
stabiliser. In particular, x is the unique vertex of GzU such that incident edge stabilisers
can induce a nontrivial free product decomposition. Thus, by Lemma 4.3, the group Gx
splits as a free product relative to the pGx , Gx q-free factor system Fx obtained from Gx
by adding one conjugacy class of cyclic subgroup for every v 1 P L.
    Since every leaf of GzU has cyclic pG, Gq-nonperipheral stabiliser, for every rHs P G,
the group H fixes (a G-translate of) x. Thus, for every rHs P G, there exists a unique
rHx sGx P Gx such that rHs “ rHx s. This shows that the set F “ G Y trGv1 suv1 PL is
a pG, Gq-free factor system preserved by ϕ. By Lemma 3.3, the outer automorphism ϕ
preserves the conjugacy class of every Gv1 with v 1 P L. In particular, it preserves rGv s
and it therefore fixes v.

    The next ingredient we need in the proof of the fact that ϕ acts trivially on the
quotient graph GzTGYH is the following lemma, which studies QH vertices of TGYH and
more generally QH vertices of G-splittings (see Section 2.3.1 for the terminology). We in
particular describe, for v a QH vertex of a G-splitting S, the image of the homomorphism
H1 pGv , Z{3Zq Ñ H1 pG, Z{3Zq induced by Gv ãÑ G. Let Σv be the compact hyperbolic
surface associated with v. Let Bdv be the set of conjugacy classes of boundary subgroups
of Σv . Let BdS be the set of conjugacy classes of boundary subgroups C of Σv such that
there exists e P ES such that C and Ge are commensurable. Let χpΣv q be the Euler
characteristic of Σv and let χS pΣv q “ χpΣv q ` |BdS |. Note that, since Σv is hyperbolic,
we have χpΣv q ă 0.
Lemma 4.5. Let G be a torsion free finitely generated group, let S be a G-splitting and
let v P V S be a QH vertex.

 (1) Suppose that χS pΣv q ă 1. For every w P V S not in the G-orbit of v, the image of
     H1 pGv , Z{3Zq in H1 pG, Z{3Zq is not contained in the image of H1 pGw , Z{3Zq in
     H1 pG, Z{3Zq.
 (2) Let C be a boundary subgroup of Σv . One of the following hold.
      (a) There exists e P ES such that Ge and C are commensurable.
       (b) The image of H1 pC, Z{3Zq in H1 pG, Z{3Zq is nontrivial. Moreover, for every
           boundary subgroup C 1 of Σv which is not G-conjugate to C, the images of
           H1 pC, Z{3Zq and H1 pC 1 , Z{3Zq are distinct.
       (c) The surface Σv is orientable and C is the unique (up to G-conjugacy) boundary
           subgroup of Σv which is not contained in BdS .
      (d) The surface Σv is orientable, C is not contained in BdS and, up to G-
          conjugacy, there exists exactly one boundary subgroup D which is not G-
          conjugate to C such that D is not contained in BdS . Moreover, if we fix an

                                            25
             orientation of Σv and we let c and d be the generators of C and D with positive
             orientation, then c and d have distinct nontrivial images in H1 pG, Z{3Zq.

Proof. We first fix some notations that we will use in the proof. We always consider
homology groups with coefficients in Z{3Z. In this proof only, x.y denotes the Z{3Z-
module freely generated by the subset. If Σv is orientable, we consider the following
presentation of its first homology group:
                                                                                        s
                                                                                        ÿ
  H1 pΣv q “ H1 pΣv , Z{3Zq “ xa1 , b1 , . . . , at , bt , c1 , . . . , cs y{x                 cj y, t ě 0 and s ě 0. (3)
                                                                                       j“1

Moreover, the image of every boundary subgroup is equal to some xci y with i P t1, . . . , su
and we identify the boundary subgroup with the corresponding xci y. If Σv is nonori-
entable, we consider
                                                                    t
                                                                    ÿ            s
                                                                                 ÿ
             H1 pΣv q “ xa1 , . . . , at , c1 , . . . , cs y {x2          ai `         cj y,
                                                                    i“1          j“1
                                                                    s
                                                                    ÿ          t
                                                                               ÿ
                        “ xa1 , . . . , at , c1 , . . . , cs y {x       cj ´         ai y, t ě 1 and s ě 0.           (4)
                                                                j“1            i“1

As above, the image of every boundary subgroup is equal to some xci y with i P t1, . . . , su
and we identify the boundary subgroup with the corresponding xci y. In either case,
denote by pΣv : xa1 , b1 , . . . , at , bt , c1 , . . . , cs y Ñ H1 pΣv q the natural projection.
    We recall some general facts about the image of H1 pGv q in H1 pGq. Let KS “
pΣv pxci yci PBdS q. By definition of a QH vertex, for every edge e P ES which is adjacent
to v, the group Ge is contained in a boundary subgroup of Σv . By Lemma 3.1, we see
that the image of H1 pGv q “ H1 pΣv q in H1 pGq is a quotient H1 pGv q{K, where K is a
subgroup of KS . Moreover, for every w P V S not in the G-orbit of v, the intersection of
the images of H1 pGv q and H1 pGw q in H1 pGq is contained in KS {K.
    We now prove the first assertion. Suppose that χS pΣv q ă 1. According to the above
discussion, it suffices to prove that KS ‰ H1 pΣv q. We distinguish between two cases,
according to the orientability of Σv .
    Suppose first that Σv is nonorientable. Recall the notations from Equation (4). If
t ě 2, then pΣv pxa1 yq is not contained in KS by Equation (4) and the conclusion follows.
Suppose that t “ 1. Then χpΣv q “ 1 ´ s. Since χS pΣv q ă 1, there exists j P t1, . . . , su
such that pΣv pcj q R KS . Thus, we have KS ‰ H1 pΣv q. This proves the first case.
    Suppose now that Σv is orientable. Recall the notations from Equation (3). If Σv
is not a punctured sphere, then t ě 1 and KS ‰ H1 pΣv q. Suppose now that Σv is a
punctured sphere. Then χpΣv q “ 2´s. Since χS pΣv q ă 1, we have |Bdv | “ s ě |BdS |`2.
Therefore, by Equation (3), we see that KS Ĺ pΣv pxci yiPt1,...,su q. This proves the first
assertion of the lemma.
   We now prove the second assertion. Let C be a boundary subgroup of Σv . Suppose
that there does not exist an edge e P ES such that C and Ge are commensurable. Thus,

                                                             26
up to reordering, we may suppose that the image of C in H1 pΣv q is equal to pΣv pxc1 yq and
that the group H generated by the image in H1 pΣv q of every boundary subgroup distinct
from C is contained in pΣv pxc2 , . . . , cs yq. We prove that C satisfies Assertion p2qpbq,pcq
or pdq. Again, we distinguish between two cases, according to the orientability of Σv .
    Suppose first that Σv is nonorientable. We prove that C satisfies Assertion p2qpbq.
As explained in the paragraph above the proof of the first assertion, since KS Ď H,
it suffices to prove that the subspace pΣv pxc1 yq is not contained in H. Since t ě 1 by
Equation (4), the subspace pΣv pxc1 yq is not contained in pΣv pxc2 , . . . , cs yq. In particular,
we see that the image of C in H1 pΣv q (which is contained in pΣv pxc1 yq) is not contained
in H Ď pΣv pxc2 , . . . , cs yq. This proves the nonorientable case.
    Suppose now that Σv is orientable. If |Bdv | “ |BdS | ` 1, then C satisfies Asser-
tion p2qpcq. So we may suppose that |Bdv | ě |BdS | ` 2. We prove that C satisfies
Assertion p2qpbq or Assertion p2qpdq. If |Bdv | ě |BdS | ` 3, then, by Equation (3), the
group pΣv pxc1 yq is not contained in H, so that Assertion p2qpbq holds.
    Finally, suppose that |Bdv | “ |BdS | ` 2 and fix an orientation of Σv . Let C, D P
Bdv ´ BdS be nonconjugate boundary subgroups and let c P C and d P D be generators
of C and D inducing the orientation of C and D. We want to show that c and d have
distinct images in H1 pGq. Up to reordering, we may suppose that c is sent to the image
of c1 in H1 pGq and d is sent to the image of c2 .ř
    Recall that the only relation in H1 pΣv q is si“1 pΣv pci q “ 0 and that the image of
H1 pΣv q in H1 pGq is isomorphic
                           řs          to a quotient of H1 pΣv q by K Ď KS Ď pΣv pxc3 , . . . , cs yq.
Thus, if the image of i“3 pΣv pci q in H     ř1 pGq is nontrivial, then c and d generate distinct
subspaces of H1 pGq. If the image of si“3 pΣv pci q in H1 pGq is trivial, then c and d are
sent in H1 pGq to distinct nontrivial elements: the image of c is equal to the image of
d´1 .

Proposition 4.6. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Let H be a finite
set of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups of G such that G is one-ended
relative to G Y H. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q be an outer automorphism preserving H and such
that H consists of periodic subgroups of ϕ. The graph automorphism induced by ϕ on
GzTGYH is trivial.

Proof. Again we assume that TGYH is not reduced to a point. In particular, by Theo-
rem 2.13p1q, there exists a nonelementary vertex stabiliser.
    The proof is similar to the one of Lemma 3.7, but we also have to deal with nontrivial
edge stabilisers. By Lemma 4.4, the automorphism ϕ fixes every leaf of GzTGYH . By
Lemma 3.6, ϕ acts trivially on H1 pGzTGYH , Z{3Zq. Thus, by Lemma 3.5, either ϕ acts
trivially on GzTGYH , or else GzTGYH is a circle and ϕ acts on it by rotation. The
conclusion in the first case being immediate, we may assume that we are in the second
case. It therefore suffices to prove that ϕ fixes a point in GzTGYH .
    Let rHs P G. By Lemma 2.16, the group H fixes a unique nonelementary vertex,
or a unique elementary vertex. In both cases, one can canonically associate to rHs a
unique vertex of GzTGYH . Since ϕ P Out0 pG, Gq, if G ‰ ∅, we see that ϕ fixes a point in
GzTGYH .


                                                 27
    Thus, we are reduced to the case where G “ ∅. This implies that G “ FN is a
nonabelian free group. Moreover, every elementary subgroup is infinite cyclic. For every
vertex v of GzTGYH , let Incv be the set of Gv -conjugacy classes of edge groups adjacent
to v. Let Fv be the minimal free factor system of Gv such that, for every rKv s P Incv ,
the group Kv is pGv , Fv q-peripheral.
    By Lemma 4.3, there exists a vertex v of GzTGYH such that Fv ‰ trGv sGv u. Since
Fv ‰ trGv sGv u, and since elementary subgroups are cyclic, the group Gv is nonelemen-
tary. Let nv ě 1 be the minimal integer such that ϕnv pvq “ v. Note that Fv is preserved
by ϕnv . Moreover, since ϕ acts as a rotation on GzTGYH , the graph automorphism of
GzTGYH induced by ϕnv is trivial.
Case 1. Suppose that the image of ϕnv in OutpGv , Fv q is finite.
     Notice that, by Theorem 2.13p8q, this includes in particular the case where v is rigid
(recall that H consists of periodic subgroups of ϕ).
     By Theorem 2.19 applied to the free product pGv , Fv q and to xϕnv v y, the group xϕnv v y
fixes a Grushko pGv , Fv q-free splitting Uv in the outer space of Gv relative to Fv .
     For every w P V GzTGYH in the ϕ-orbit of v, let Uw be the Grushko pGw , Fw q-free
splitting whose underlying tree is the same as Uv , and the action of g P Gw is given
by the action of Φ´n  w
                        w pgq P G , where n
                                  v           w is the minimal positive integer such that
ϕ w pvq “ w and Φw P ϕnw is such that Φw pGv q “ Gw . We claim that the Grushko
  n

pGw , Fw q-free splitting Uw only depends on Uv and ϕ. Indeed, if Φw , Φ1w P ϕnw are such
that Φw pGv q “ Gw “ Φ1w pGv q, then Φ1w ˝ Φ´1   w is an inner automorphism adh of FN
preserving Gw . Since Gw is nonelementary, it fixes a unique vertex in TGYH , so that it
is its own normaliser in FN . In particular, h P Gw and the construction of Uw does not
depend on the choice of Φw . Therefore, the splitting Uw is preserved by ϕnwv .
     Let U be the splitting of FN obtained from TGYH by blowing up, for every m ě 1,
the splitting Uϕm pvq at ϕm pvq and attaching the adjacent edges of ϕm pvq to the unique
points fixed by their edge groups. Note that U is fixed by ϕ since the construction of
the splitting Uw with w P xϕyv is ϕ-equivariant.
     Let S 1 be the free splitting of FN obtained from U by collapsing all edges with
nontrivial stabiliser. Then S 1 is a ϕ-invariant free splitting of FN .
     We claim that, if ϕ acts nontrivially on FN zTGYH , then it also acts nontrivially on
FN zS 1 . Indeed, any nontrivial action of ϕ on FN zTGYH will permute the subgraphs of
S 1 corresponding to points in the outer space of pGw , Fw q with w P V FN zTGYH .
     By Lemma 3.7, the automorphism ϕ acts trivially on FN zS 1 . Thus, ϕ acts trivially
on FN zTGYH . This concludes the proof of Case 1.
Case 2. Suppose that v is flexible.
    By Theorem 2.13p5q, the vertex v is a QH vertex. Let Σv be the associated compact
surface. Recall the notations Bdv , BdS and χS pΣv q from just above Lemma 4.5. Since
FN zTGYH is a circle, we have |BdS | ď 2. In particular, since Σv is hyperbolic, we have
χpΣv q ď ´1 and χS pΣv q ď 1.
    Suppose first that χS pΣv q “ 1. Then χpΣv q “ ´1 and |BdS | “ 2, so that Σv has at
least two boundary components. This implies that Σv is isomorphic to a pair of pants or

                                              28
a twice-punctured projective plane. In both cases, these surfaces have a finite mapping
class group (see [Kor, Corollary 4.6] for the twice-punctured projective plane). Since ϕnv
maps into the mapping class group of Σv by Theorem 2.13p9q, the case where χS pΣv q “ 1
follows from Case 1.
    Finally, suppose that χS pΣv q ă 1. By Lemma 4.5p1q, for every w P V TGYH not in
the G-orbit of v, the image of H1 pGv , Z{3Zq in H1 pG, Z{3Zq is distinct from the image
of H1 pGw , Z{3Zq in H1 pG, Z{3Zq. In particular, since ϕ P IApG, G, 3q, the vertex v is
fixed by ϕ. Hence ϕ acts trivially on FN zTGYH .

4.2   Understanding the outer action on the vertex groups
By Proposition 4.6, for every vertex v P V TGYH (resp. every edge e P ETGYH ), the outer
automorphism ϕ induces an outer automorphism ϕv P OutpGv q (resp. (ϕe P OutpGe q).
We now investigate the outer action of ϕv on Gv according to the nature of v.
Lemma 4.7. Let G be a torsion free finitely generated group and let S be a G-splitting.
Let v P V S be a QH vertex and let Σv be the associated compact surface. Let ϕ P
OutpGq X KpSq be an outer automorphism acting trivially on H1 pG, Z{3Zq.
   Suppose that, for every edge e P ES adjacent to v with Ge » Z, the outer auto-
morphism ϕe is trivial. Then ϕ preserves the G-conjugacy class of a generator of every
boundary subgroup of π1 pΣv q.
Proof. Suppose first that S is reduced to the vertex v. Then G is a surface group and
the lemma follows from the work of Ivanov [Iva, Theorem 1.2].
    So we may suppose that S is not reduced to a vertex. Let C be a boundary subgroup
of π1 pΣv q and let c be a generator of C. Note that, since G is torsion free, the group C
is infinite cyclic. By definition of a QH vertex, for every edge e P ES adjacent to v, the
group Ge is contained in a boundary subgroup of Σv . We now examine the four possible
cases given by Lemma 4.5p2q.
    Suppose that Lemma 4.5p2qpaq occurs, so that there exists an edge e of S such that
Ge is a finite index subgroup of C. Let Φ P ϕ be an automorphism preserving Ge and
Gv . By assumption, we have Φ|Ge “ idGe . Since Gv » π1 pΣv q is a finitely generated free
group, Ge is contained in a unique maximal cyclic subgroup C 1 , so that Φ preserves C 1
and C Ď C 1 . As Φ fixes Ge elementwise, it also fixes C 1 and C elementwise. Thus, we
see that ϕ preserves the conjugacy class of c.
    Suppose that Lemma 4.5p2qpbq occurs: the image of H1 pC, Z{3Zq in H1 pG, Z{3Zq is
nontrivial and, for every boundary subgroup C 1 of Σv which is not conjugate to C, the
images of H1 pC, Z{3Zq and H1 pC 1 , Z{3Zq in H1 pG, Z{3Zq are distinct. Since ϕ permutes
the conjugacy classes of the generators of the boundary subgroups of Σv and since ϕ acts
trivially on H1 pG, Z{3Zq, we see that the conjugacy class of c is fixed by ϕ.
Claim. Suppose that Lemma 4.5p2qpcq or pdq occur so that Σv is orientable. Then ϕv
preserves the orientation of Σv .

Proof. As S is a connected G-splitting, there exists a boundary component C 1 of π1 pΣv q
which is commensurable to an edge stabiliser Ge of e P ES. Since ϕe acts trivially on Ge ,

                                           29
any automorphism in the outer class of ϕ preserving e also acts trivially on C 1 . Thus, ϕv
preserves the orientation at any point contained in the boundary of Σv associated with
C 1 . This shows that ϕv induces an orientation-preserving mapping class of Σv .

    Suppose that Lemma 4.5p2qpcq occurs, so that Σv is orientable and C is the only
boundary subgroup which is not commensurable to an edge stabiliser. We fix an ori-
entation of Σv so that c is a positive generator of C. By the Claim, ϕv preserves the
orientation of Σv . Thus ϕv sends rcs to the conjugacy class of a generator of C inducing
the orientation, that is ϕprcsq “ rcs.
    Finally, suppose that Lemma 4.5p2qpdq occurs, so that Σv is orientable and that there
exists a unique (up to conjugacy) boundary subgroup D of Σv which is not conjugate
to C and which is not commensurable to an edge stabiliser. Again, fixing an orientation
of Σv , we may suppose that c is a positive generator of C and that d P D is a positive
generator of D. By the Claim, ϕv preserves the orientation of Σv , so that ϕv sends rcs
to either itself or rds. By Lemma 4.5p2qpdq the images of c and d in H1 pG, Z{3Zq are
distinct. Since ϕ acts trivially on H1 pG, Z{3Zq, we see that ϕ preserves the conjugacy
class of c.

Lemma 4.8. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Let H be a finite
set of conjugacy classes of finitely generated subgroups of G such that G is one-ended
relative to G Y H. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q be an outer automorphism preserving H and such
that H consists of periodic subgroups of ϕ.
    Let v P V TGYH be a rigid vertex. Suppose that, for every edge e P ETGYH adjacent
to v with Ge » Z, the outer automorphism ϕe is trivial. Then ϕv “ id.

Proof. By Theorem 2.13p4q, the group Gv is finitely generated. Thus, the pair pGv , Gv q
defines a free product. By Theorem 2.13p8q, the outer automorphism ϕv of Gv induced
by ϕ is of finite order. We will prove that ϕv is in fact trivial. By Theorem 2.19, there
exists a Grushko pGv , Gv q-free splitting Sv which is preserved by ϕv .
Claim. The outer automorphism ϕv acts trivially on the quotient graph Gv zSv .

Proof. We will prove the Claim using Lemma 3.5. Notice that we do not know that
ϕv acts trivially on H1 pGv , Z{3Zq, so that we cannot apply Lemma 3.6. In order to
overcome this difficulty, we need a more detailed analysis of the action of ϕv on Gv zSv .
Step 1. ϕv fixes every vertex of Gv zSv with nontrivial stabiliser. In particular, ϕv fixes
every leaf of Gv zSv .

Proof. Since edge stabilisers in Sv are trivial, and since the action of Gv on Sv is minimal,
it suffices to prove that ϕv preserves the Gv -conjugacy class rHsGv of every nontrivial
vertex stabiliser H of Sv . Let rHsGv P Gv be the Gv -conjugacy class of a vertex stabiliser
H of Sv . Since TGYH is a pG, Gq-elementary splitting, H has a fixed point in TGYH .
Moreover, either rHsG P G and v is the unique fixed point of H or else H is the inter-
section of Gv with an elementary vertex stabiliser, that is, H is a stabiliser of an edge
adjacent to v. Let us examine both cases.


                                             30
    Suppose that H is the stabiliser of an edge e adjacent to v. By Proposition 4.6, the
outer automorphism ϕ acts trivially on the quotient graph GzTGYH . In particular, ϕ has
a representative Φ fixing e. Hence ΦpGv q “ Gv and ΦpHq “ H, that is, ϕv preserves the
Gv -conjugacy class of H.
    Suppose now that v is the unique fixed point of H and that rHsG P G. Since
ϕ P Out0 pG, Gq, the outer class ϕ preserves the G-conjugacy class of H. By [GL2,
Lemma 2.2] (applied with K “ Gv ), as H does not fix an edge in TGYH , the outer
automorphism ϕv preserves the Gv -conjugacy class of H. The first assertion of the claim
follows. Since the action of Gv on Sv is minimal, every leaf of Gv zSv has nontrivial
stabiliser, so that ϕv fixes every leaf of Gv zSv by the first assertion.              ■

   Let Incv be the set of Gv -conjugacy classes of edge stabilisers of TGYH incident to v.
Let Inccyc
       v be the subset of Incv consisting of Gv -conjugacy classes of edge stabilisers of
TGYH incident to v with pG, Gq-nonperipheral cyclic stabiliser.
Step 2. Let rGe sGv P Inccyc
                           v   and let c P Ge be a generator. Then c acts loxodromically
on Sv . Moreover, there exists Φv P ϕv such that Φv pcq “ c. Thus, Φv preserves the axis
Axpcq of c in Sv as well as its orientation.

Proof. Since c is pG, Gq-nonperipheral, it does not fix a point in the Grushko pGv , Gv q-
free splitting Sv . Thus, c acts loxodromically on Sv . Since ϕ acts trivially on every edge
group Ge with Ge » Z by assumption, there exists Φv P ϕv such that Φv pcq “ c (take
any representative fixing the edge e). Thus, Φv preserves the axis Axpcq of c in Sv as
well as its orientation.                                                                  ■

    If rGe sGv P Inccyc
                     v , and if ce is a generator of Ge , we denote by γce the projection of
                           Sv
Axpce q in Gv zSv . Let KInc  cyc be the subgroup of H1 pGv zSv , Zq generated by the classes
                              v
                            cyc
rγce s with rxce ysGv P Incv . Let KIncv (resp. KInccyc  v
                                                           ) be the subgroup of H1 pGv , Zq
generated by the image of xGe yrGe sGv PIncv (resp. of xGe yrGe sGv PInccyc
                                                                        v
                                                                            ).

Step 3. The outer automorphism ϕv acts trivially on H1 pGv zSv , Zq.
                                                  Sv
Proof. By Step 2, ϕv fixes elementwise the group KInc cyc . Let T be the torsion part
                                                           v
                                 Sv
of the quotient H1 pGv zSv , Zq{KInc cyc and let V be the preimage of T in H1 pGv zSv , Zq.
                                    v
                                                                                  Sv
Note that V is a direct factor of H1 pGv zSv , Zq. Then V is preserved by ϕv and KInc cyc
                                                                                          v
                                                     Sv
has finite index in V . Since ϕv fixes elementwise KInc cyc and since V is a free abelian
                                                        v
group, it follows that ϕv fixes elementwise V .
   We now claim that ϕv fixes elementwise the free abelian group H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V .
Since ϕv has finite order, it induces a finite order automorphism of H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V .
Since             ´                                                       ¯
               ker GLpH1 pGv zSv , Zq{V q Ñ GLpH1 pGv zSv , Zq{V b Z{3Zq

is torsion free, it suffices to prove that ϕv acts trivially on H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V b Z{3Z.
    Let H be the image of the homomorphism H1 pGv , Z{3Zq Ñ H1 pG, Z{3Zq. Let
KIncv pZ{3Zq be the image of KIncv in H1 pGv , Z{3Zq. By Proposition 4.6, we have


                                             31
ϕ P KpTGYH q. Thus, by Lemma 3.1, there exists a subgroup K of KIncv pZ{3Zq such
that the group H fits in an exact sequence of ϕv -equivariant maps

                                  K Ñ H1 pGv , Z{3Zq Ñ H.                                   (5)

The projection prv : H1 pGv , Zq Ñ H1 pGv zSv , Zq is surjective and ϕv -equivariant. If
rGe sGv P Incv zInccyc
                   v , then Ge is a fixed point of Sv , so that the images of Ge in π1 pGv zSv q
and H1 pGv zSv , Zq are trivial. Therefore, we have
                                                            Sv
                           prv pKIncv q “ prv pKInccyc
                                                   v
                                                       q “ KInc cyc Ď V.
                                                               v

Thus, the projection

                         pv : H1 pGv , Zq{KIncv Ñ H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V

is well-defined, surjective and ϕv -equivariant. Tensoring by Z{3Z, the homomorphism

                   H1 pGv , Zq{KIncv b Z{3Z Ñ H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V b Z{3Z                      (6)

is surjective and ϕv -equivariant. The group H1 pGv , Zq{KIncv b Z{3Z is isomorphic to
H1 pGv , Z{3Zq{KIncv pZ{3Zq (recall that we defined KIncv pZ{3Zq as the image of KIncv
in H1 pGv , Z{3Zq). By Equation (5), the group H1 pGv , Z{3Zq{KIncv pZ{3Zq is a quotient
of H. Therefore, H surjects ϕv -equivariantly onto the group H1 pGv , Zq{KIncv b Z{3Z.
Combining Equations (5) and (6), we obtain a ϕv -equivariant surjective homomorphism

                               H Ñ H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V b Z{3Z.

Since H Ď H1 pG, Z{3Zq and since ϕv P IApG, G, 3q, ϕv acts trivially on H and hence on
H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V b Z{3Z. This proves that ϕv fixes pointwise H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V .
    Let x P H1 pGv zSv , Zq. Since ϕv fixes pointwise both V and H1 pGv zSv , Zq{V , there
exists vx P V such that ϕv pxq “ x ` vx . Since ϕv pvx q “ vx and since ϕv is a finite order
automorphism of H1 pGv zSv , Zq, we necessarily have vx “ 0, so that ϕv fixes pointwise
H1 pGv zSv , Zq.                                                                          ■

    By Step 3, ϕv fixes pointwise H1 pGv zSv , Zq and H1 pGv zSv , Z{3Zq. By Step 1, ϕv
fixes every leaf of Gv zSv . By Lemma 3.5, either ϕv fixes pointwise Gv zSv or else Gv zSv
is a circle and ϕv acts as a rotation on it.
    In order to prove that ϕv fixes pointwise Gv zSv , it remains to prove that, if Gv zSv
is a circle, then ϕv fixes a point in it. So suppose that Gv zSv is a circle. Since Gv is
nonelementary, in particular noncyclic, the graph of groups Gv zSv contains a vertex with
nontrivial stabiliser. By Step 1, this vertex is fixed by ϕv . The conclusion follows.

    By the claim, ϕv lies in KpSv q. We now use the short exact sequence in Proposition 2.4
to prove that ϕv is trivial. Suppose first that Gv “ ∅. By Proposition 2.4, we have
KpSv q “ tidu, so the conclusion follows in this case.
    Suppose that Gv ‰ ∅ and let rHs P Gv with H ‰ t1u. We have a natural homomor-
phism xϕv y Ñ AutpHq given by sending ϕv to the unique representative ΦH of ϕv which
fixes a chosen edge adjacent to the vertex fixed by H.

                                                32
    There exists a unique i P t1, . . . , ku such that H Ď Gi . Uniqueness of Gi implies
that the automorphism ΦH extends to a representative Φ of ϕ which preserves Gi . Since
ϕ|Gi P Out˚ pGi q, we have Φ|Gi P Aut˚ pGi q. In particular, by Item p4q of the Standing
Assumptions, every element of H which is Φ-periodic (and hence ΦH -periodic) is fixed.
As ΦH is finite order since ϕv is, we see that the image of ϕv in AutpHq is trivial.
    By Proposition 2.4, the outer automorphism ϕv is contained in a direct product N
of groups, each direct factor being isomorphic to a subgroup H of Gv with rHs P Gv .
Since G is torsion free, we see that N is torsion free. In particular, ϕv is trivial.

4.3     Conclusion and proof of Theorem 4.1
In this section, we prove Theorem 4.1 by combining the results of the above sections.
We first record the following elementary lemma.

Lemma 4.9. Let pG, Gq be a free product with G torsion free and let g P G be pG, Gq-
nonperipheral. Then NG pxgyq “ CG pgq is root–closed and infinite cyclic.

Proof. Let h P G ´ t1u and let m ą 0 be such that hm P NG pxgyq. Let T be a Grushko
pG, Gq-free splitting. Since g is pG, Gq-nonperipheral, it acts loxodromically on T . Let
Axpgq be the axis of g. Then for every n P Z˚ , we have Axpgq “ Axpg n q. Since
hm P NG pxgyq, we have

                            hm Axpgq “ Axphm gh´m q “ Axpgq.

Thus, the group xg, hm y preserves Axpgq.
    The group H “ StabG pAxpgqq has an index two subgroup H 1 preserving the ori-
entation of Axpgq. Thus, we have a homomorphism H 1 Ñ Z given by the translation
length in Axpgq. Since T is a free splitting, the kernel of H 1 Ñ Z is trivial. Thus, H is
virtually cyclic. Since G is torsion free, the group H is cyclic, generated by an element
acting loxodromically on Axpgq. Since hm P H ´ t1u, h and hm acts loxodromically on
T and Axphq “ Axphm q “ Axpgq. Thus, h is contained in the cyclic group H, so that h
commutes with g.

      We are now ready to prove the main theorem of this section.

Proof of Theorem 4.1. The proof is by induction on the Grushko rank ξpG, Gq of pG, Gq.
If ξpG, Gq “ 1, then either G “ G1 or else G “ Z. If G “ G1 , then the result follows
from Item p3q of the Standing Assumptions. If G “ Z, then IApG, G, 3q “ tIdu and the
result is immediate.
    Suppose now that ξpG, Gq ě 2. Let F be the minimal pG, Gq-free factor system such
that for every rHs P H, the group H is pG, Fq-peripheral. Then ϕ preserves F. By
Lemma 3.3, every element of F is preserved by ϕ.
    Let rAs P F and let ϕ|A P OutpAq be the outer automrophism of A induced by ϕ.
Let HA be the set of A-conjugacy classes of subgroups of A induced by H. Suppose that
F ‰ trGsu. Then, for every rAs P F, we have ξpA, G|A q ă ξpG, Gq. By Lemma 3.9 and


                                           33
                                                                      ptq
the inductive hypothesis, for every rAs P F , we have ϕ|A P OutpA, HA q. We deduce that
ϕ P OutpG, Hptq q.
    So we may suppose that F “ trGsu, that is, G is one-ended relative to G Y H. The
group G is hyperbolic relative to G. Let TGYH be the JSJ pG, G YHq-elementary splitting
given by Theorem 2.13. The tree TGYH is preserved by ϕ. By Proposition 4.6, the graph
automorphism induced by ϕ on GzTGYH is trivial. Therefore, for every v P V TGYH ,
we have a natural homomorphism xϕy Ñ OutpGv q. Recall that we denote the image
of ϕ by ϕv . Similarly, for every edge e P ETGYH , we have a natural homomorphism
xϕy Ñ OutpGe q and we denote the image of ϕ by ϕe .
    For every v P V TGYH , let Hv be the set of Gv -conjugacy classes of subgroups of Gv
induced by H. Since for every rHs P H, the group H is elliptic in TGYH , it suffices to
                                                           ptq
prove that, for every v P V TGYH , we have ϕv P OutpGv , Hv q. We first need the following
claim.
Claim. Let e P ETGYH be such that Ge » Z. Then ϕe “ id.

Proof. Let Φe P ϕe be induced by the restriction to Ge of a representative Φ of ϕ
preserving e and let t be a generator of Ge . Then Φe ptq “ t or Φe ptq “ t´1 . Thus, t is a
periodic element of Φe and of Φ. Suppose that Ge is contained in a peripheral subgroup
Gi with i P t1, . . . , ku. Since Gi is malnormal, Gi is the unique subgroup of G containing
Ge such that rGi s P G. Thus ΦpGi q “ Gi . By Item p4q of the Standing Assumptions, we
see that Φe ptq “ Φ|Gi ptq “ t.
     Thus, we may suppose that Ge is pG, Gq-nonperipheral. In that case, by Lemma 4.9,
t is not conjugate to t´1 in G. Thus, it suffices to prove that ϕ preserves the conjugacy
class of t in G.
     By Lemma 4.3, the group Ge is contained in a proper pG, Gq-free factor. Let A be the
minimal (necessarily proper) pG, Gq-free factor containing Ge . Then rAs is preserved by
ϕ. Moreover, since A is a pG, Gq-free factor, the image ϕ|A of ϕ in OutpAq is contained
in IApA, G|A , 3q by Lemma 3.9. Since OutpGe q is finite, every A-conjugacy class of an
element in Ge is ϕ|A -periodic. Since A is proper, we have ξpA, G|A q ă ξpG, Gq. By the
induction hypothesis, we see that ϕ|A preserves the A-conjugacy class of t and that Φe
fixes Ge elementwise.
                                                                       ptq
   We now prove that, for every v P V TGYH , we have ϕv P OutpGv , Hv q. We distinguish
between several cases, according to the nature of v.
Case 1. Suppose that Gv is elementary noncyclic.
    In that case, we have rGv s P G. By Item p3q of the Standing Assumptions, since
                                            ptq
ϕ P IApG, G, 3q, we see that ϕv P OutpGv , Hv q.
Case 2. Suppose that Gv is elementary cyclic.
    Since edge stabilisers are infinite, there exists an edge e adjacent to v such that Ge
has finite index in Gv . By the claim, we see that ϕe acts trivially on Ge . Since Ge Ď Gv
is infinite cyclic, this implies that ϕv acts trivially on Gv .


                                            34
Case 3. Suppose that v is rigid.
    By the Claim, we see that ϕ acts trivially on the stabiliser of every edge e adjacent
to v with Ge » Z. By Lemma 4.8, the outer automorphism ϕv is trivial.
Case 4. Suppose that Gv is a flexible nonelementary vertex.
    Recall that, by Theorem 2.13p5q, there exists a compact surface Σv such that Gv
is isomorphic to π1 pΣv q. Moreover, for every edge e adjacent to Gv , the group Ge is
contained in a boundary subgroup of π1 pΣv q and, for every rHs P Hv , the group H is
contained in a boundary subgroup of π1 pΣv q.
    The outer class ϕv then induces an outer automorphism of π1 pΣv q preserving the set
of conjugacy classes of boundary subgroups of π1 pΣv q. Therefore, it suffices to prove
that ϕv fixes the conjugacy class of a generator of every boundary subgroup of π1 pΣv q.
By the Claim, we see that ϕ acts trivially on the stabiliser of every edge e adjacent to v
with Ge » Z. By Lemma 4.7, the outer automorphism ϕv preserves the conjugacy class
of a generator of every boundary subgroup. This concludes the proof of the last case
and the proof of the theorem.

   We finish this section with a proof of the Aut-version of Theorem 4.1.
Corollary 4.10. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Consider an
automorphism Φ P IAAut pG, G, 3q. Every Φ-periodic element of G is fixed by Φ.
Proof. Let g be a Φ-periodic element of G, let H “ xϕℓ pgqyℓPN and let H “ trHsu. Since
g is Φ-periodic, the group H is finitely generated and Φ-invariant. Let A be the minimal
pG, Gq-free factor containing H. Then A is preserved by Φ. Thus, using an inductive
argument, we may suppose that G “ A.
    Then the group G is one-ended relative to G Y H. Let TGYH be the associated JSJ
pG, G Y Hq-elementary splitting given by Theorem 2.13.
    Let ϕ “ rΦs P OutpGq. By Proposition 4.6, the outer automorphism ϕ acts trivially
on the quotient graph GzTGYH . Moreover, by the Claim in the proof of Theorem 4.1,
the outer automorphism ϕ acts trivially on every edge group with cyclic stabiliser.
    The group H fixes a point v in TGYH . Moreover, one can choose v so that Gv is
preserved by Φ. Indeed, By Lemma 2.16, the group H fixes a unique elementary vertex
or a unique nonelementary vertex. We investigate different cases according to v.
    If Gv is elementary noncyclic, then, by Item p4q of the Standing Assumptions, the
automorphism Φ acts trivially on H.
    Suppose that Gv is elementary cyclic. Since ϕ acts trivially on cyclic edge stabilisers
of TGYH , we see that Φv acts trivially on H.
    Suppose that Gv is nonelementary and rigid. By Lemma 4.8, the automorphism Φ
acts on Gv as a global conjugation by an element h P Gv . Thus, for every ℓ ą 0, we have
Φℓ pgq “ hℓ gh´ℓ . As g is Φ-periodic, there exists m ą 0 such that hm P Cpgq.
    Suppose that g is pG, Gq-nonperipheral. Then its centraliser is infinite cyclic and
root–closed by Lemma 4.9. Hence h P Cpgq and g is fixed by Φ.
    Suppose that there exists rGi s P G with g P Gi . Then Gi is preserved by Φ. This
case then follows from Item p4q of the Standing Assumptions.

                                            35
    Finally, suppose that Gv is nonelementary and flexible. By Theorem 2.13p5q, there
exists a compact surface Σv such that Gv is isomorphic to π1 pΣv q. Moreover, the group
H is contained in a unique boundary subgroup. By Lemma 4.7, the automorphism Φ
fixes elementwise this boundary subgroup. This concludes the proof.


5     Periodic free factor systems
Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. In this section, we prove the
following theorem.
Theorem 5.1. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q.
Every ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free factor system is fixed by ϕ.
    The proof of Theorem 5.1 relies on the study of maximal ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free factor
systems. We use two distinct techniques according to whether the free factor system is
sporadic or not.
    If the free factor system is sporadic, then it induces a natural ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free
splitting. Therefore, we are left with studying ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free splittings. This is
the content of Section 5.1.
    When the free factor system is nonsporadic, one can naturally associate to it an
attracting lamination of ϕ. Attracting laminations are dynamical invariants of ϕ on
which ϕ naturally acts. The action of ϕ on the (finite) set of attracting laminations is
encoded in a relative train track of ϕ. This action is studied in details in Section 5.2.

5.1   JSJ decompositions of suspensions and periodic free splittings
Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions and let ϕ P OutpG, Gq. In this
section, we prove the following theorem.
Theorem 5.2. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q.
Every ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free splitting is fixed by ϕ.
    Let Φ P ϕ be a representative of ϕ. The proof requires the understanding of cyclic
splittings of the suspension of G by Φ, which is the group

                       GΦ “ G ¸Φ Z “ xG, t | tgt´1 “ ϕpgq @g P Gy.

If Ψ P AutpG, Gq is in the same outer class as Φ, then GΦ and GΨ are isomorphic.
Therefore, if ϕ P OutpG, Gq and Φ P ϕ, we can denote by Gϕ a group whose one of its
presentation is GΦ .
    We will see in Proposition 5.6 that the tree of cylinders of a JSJ Gϕ -cyclic splitting
encodes the set of all ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free splittings. This shows that it will be sufficient
to understand the action of Gϕ on its tree of cylinders in order to understand all ϕ-
periodic pG, Gq-free splittings.
    Note that if T is a Gϕ -splitting in which G does not fix a point, then the restricted
action of G on T induces a G-splitting T G . Indeed, the fact that the action of G on T is

                                              36
minimal follows from the facts that G is a normal subgroup of Gϕ and that the action of
Gϕ on T is minimal. We record in the following lemma information regarding the tree
T seen either as a Gϕ -splitting or a G-splitting.

Lemma 5.3 ([Dah2, Lemmas 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9]). Let pG, Gq be a free product and let
ϕ P OutpG, Gq. Let T be a Gϕ -splitting in which G does not fix a point.

 (1) If c is a cell of T , then the GΦ -stabiliser of c is isomorphic to Gc ¸ Z, where Gc is
     the G-stabiliser of c.

 (2) If the GΦ -edge stabilisers are all virtually cyclic, there does not exist a cell c of T
     whose GΦ -stabiliser is infinitely-ended.

 (3) If T is a Gϕ -cyclic splitting such that, for every rGi s P G, the group Gi is elliptic,
     then T G is a pG, Gq-free splitting.

    Let F be a sporadic proper pG, Gq-free factor system. One can canonically associate
to F a pG, Gq-free splitting TF . The conjugacy classes of vertex stabilisers of TF are
contained in F and TF has a unique orbit of edges. The group AutpG, F q preserves the
G-equivariant isometry class of TF . In particular, we have the following, where the last
assertion follows from Lemma 5.3(1).

Lemma 5.4. Let pG, Gq be a free product and let F be a sporadic pG, Gq-free factor system.
Let Φ P AutpG, Fq.

 (1) The action of G on TF extends to an action of GΦ on TF .

 (2) The GΦ -splitting TF is a GΦ -cyclic splitting.

   By Lemma 5.3p1q, the group Gϕ is one-ended. Since G is finitely presented by the
Standing Assumptions, so is Gϕ .
   Let TJSJ pGϕ q be a JSJ Gϕ -cyclic splitting given by Theorem 2.8 and let Tc pGϕ q be
the associated tree of cyclinders. We note that the tree Tc pGϕ q was already considered
by Guirardel–Horbez [GH3, Theorem 6.12] when G is a free group.
   We now give a description of the vertex stabilisers of the tree Tc pGϕ q (considered as
a Gϕ -splitting). If Φ P ϕ, recall that PerpΦq is the periodic subgroup of Φ.

Lemma 5.5. Let v P V Tc pGϕ q.

 (1) Suppose that v corresponds to a cylinder C Ď TJSJ pϕq. Let e P EC, let ℓ ą 0 and
     let Φ P ϕℓ which generates pGϕ qe . There exist m ą 0 dividing ℓ and Ψ P ϕm such
     that the stabiliser of v in Gϕ is equal to PerpΦq ¸Ψ Z.

 (2) If v is a vertex of TJSJ pGϕ q, there exist a pG, Gq-free factor A, ℓ ą 0 and a
     representative Φ P ϕℓ preserving A such that pGϕ qv is equal to A ¸Φ Z. Moreover,
                                                              G pG q induces a pG, Gq-
     the set of G-conjugacy classes of vertex stabilisers of TJSJ   ϕ
     free factor system.

                                             37
Proof. The fact that the stabiliser of a cylinder vertex is isomorphic to PerpΦq ¸Ψ Z
follows from [AGH, Lemma 6.2].
    We now prove the second assertion. The tree TJSJ pGϕ q is a Gϕ -cyclic splitting.
Therefore, by Lemma 5.3p3q, the tree TJSJ G pG q is a pG, Gq-free splitting. In particular,
                                                ϕ
                              G
every vertex stabiliser of TJSJ pGϕ q is a pG, Gq-free factor and the set of G-conjugacy
                                  G pϕq is a pG, Gq-free factor system. By Lemma 5.3p1q,
classes of vertex stabilisers of TJSJ
for every vertex v of TJSJ pGϕ q, there exist a free factor A of pG, Gq, ℓ ą 0 and a
representative Φ P ϕℓ preserving A such that pGϕ qv is equal to A ¸Φ Z.

Proposition 5.6. Let S be a ϕ-invariant pG, Gq-free splitting. Then S and TcG pGϕ q
are compatible as pG, Gq-splittings. Moreover, a common refinement is obtained from
TcG pGϕ q by blowing-up trees at its cylinder vertices.

Proof. Since S is ϕ-invariant, the G-action on S extends to a Gϕ -action. By Lemma 5.3,
S is a Gϕ -cyclic splitting. We want to apply Lemma 2.11 to conclude the proof. There-
fore, it suffices to show that every vertex of TJSJ pGϕ q is rigid.
    By Theorem 2.8, flexible vertices are infinitely ended. By Lemma 5.3p2q, there does
not exist a Gϕ -cyclic splitting with an infinitely-ended vertex stabiliser. Therefore, every
vertex of TJSJ pGϕ q is rigid. Thus, by Lemma 2.11, a common refinement is obtained
from Tc pGϕ q by blowing-up trees at its cylinder vertices.

   We can now prove the main theorem of the section.

Proof of Theorem 5.2. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q. Let S be a ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free splitting.
Let ℓ ą 0 be such that ϕℓ fixes S and acts trivially on GzS. Let Tc pGϕℓ q be the tree
of cylinders associated with a JSJ pGϕℓ , Gq-cyclic splitting given by Proposition 2.10.
Note that, for every rGi s P G, the group Gi is elliptic in Tc pGϕℓ q as it is elliptic in any
JSJ pGϕℓ , Gq-cyclic splitting. We denote by TcG pGϕℓ q the tree Tc pGϕℓ q considered as a
pG, Gq-splitting. It comes equipped with a partition of its vertices V TcG pGϕℓ q “ Vr0 Vr1
                                                                                          š

where, for every v P Vr0 , v corresponds to a vertex in TJSJ pGϕℓ q and, for every v P Vr1 ,
                                                                       š
v corresponds to a cylinder of TJSJ pGϕℓ q. Let V GzTcG pGϕℓ q “ V0 V1 be the induced
partition.
    Note that the group Gϕℓ is a normal subgroup of Gϕ , so that the action of Gϕ on Gϕℓ
by conjugation induces a homomorphism Gϕ Ñ AutpGϕℓ q. Since Tc pGϕℓ q is preserved
by AutpGϕℓ q by Proposition 2.10, we obtain an action of Gϕ on Tc pGϕℓ q. In particular,
the outer automorphism ϕ preserves TcG pGϕℓ q.
Claim 1. Let v P Vr1 be a cylinder vertex. There exists Φ P ϕ such that Gv “ FixpΦq.

Proof. By Lemma 5.5, there exists Ψ P ϕℓ such that the G-stabiliser of v is isomorphic
to PerpΨq. By Theorem 4.1 applied to H “ tϕn rPerpΨqsunPN , there exists Φ P ϕ such
that PerpΨq “ FixpΦq. In particular, the G-stabiliser of any cylinder of TcG pGϕℓ q is a
fixed subgroup of some Φ P ϕ.

Claim 2. The outer class ϕ fixes pointwise the graph GzTcG pGϕℓ q.

                                             38
Proof. By Lemma 3.6, ϕ acts trivially on H1 pGzTcG pGϕℓ q, Z{3Zq. In order to apply
Lemma 3.5, we need to prove that ϕ fixes every leaf of GzTcG pGϕℓ q.
Step 1. Let v P V0 . If Gv is nontrivial, then ϕ fixes v.

Proof. By Lemma 5.5p1q, the set of G-stabilisers of vertices in Vr0 is a ϕ-invariant pG, Gq-
free factor system FVr0 . Thus v is the unique vertex in Vr0 fixed by Gv . Therefore, it
suffices to prove that ϕ preserves the G-conjugacy class of Gv . By Lemma 3.3, every
G-conjugacy class in FVr0 is ϕ-invariant. In particular, rGv s is ϕ-invariant and v is fixed
by ϕ.                                                                                     ■

Step 2. The outer class ϕ fixes every leaf of GzTcG pGϕℓ q.

Proof. Let v be a leaf of GzTcG pGϕℓ q, let e be its adjacent edge and let w be the endpoint
of e distinct from v.
    Suppose first that v P V0 . Since v is a leaf, by minimality of the action of G on
TcG pGϕℓ q, its G-stabiliser is nontrivial. Thus, by Step 1, v is fixed by ϕ.
    Assume now that v P V1 . By Claim 1, there exists Φ P ϕ such that Gv “ FixpΦq.
By minimality of the action of G on TcG pGϕℓ q, we have Gv Ę Gw . Thus, v is the only
fixed point of FixpΦq, so that Φ (and hence ϕ) fixes v. Thus, ϕ fixes every leaf of
GzTcG pGϕℓ q.                                                                             ■

    By Step 2 and Lemma 3.5, either ϕ fixes pointwise GzTcG pGϕℓ q, or else GzTcG pGϕℓ q
is a circle and ϕ acts as a rotation on it. So, in order to prove that ϕ fixes pointwise
GzTcG pGϕℓ q, it remains to prove that ϕ fixes a point in it.
    By Step 1, if there exists v P V0 with Gv ‰ t1u, then ϕ fixes v. Assume that, for
every v P V0 , we have Gv “ t1u. Since every edge of TcG pGϕℓ q has an endpoint in Vr0 , it
follows that TcG pGϕℓ q is a pG, Gq-free splitting. By Lemma 3.7, since ϕ P IApG, G, 3q, ϕ
fixes pointwise GzTcG pϕℓ q. As we have ruled out every case, the claim follows.

Claim 3. Let v P Vr1 be a cylinder vertex. There exists Φ P ϕ such that Φ fixes pointwise
the star of v in Tc pGϕℓ q.

Proof. Let C Ď TJSJ pϕℓ q be the cylinder corresponding to v and let Ψ P ϕℓ be a generator
of an edge stabiliser in C (Ψ is not contained in a strict power of ϕℓ since ϕℓ P IApG, G, 3q
                       G pϕℓ q by Lemma 3.7). By Corollary 4.10, the periodic subgroup
acts trivially on GzTJSJ
of Ψ is equal to its fixed subgroup, so that Gv “ FixpΨq.
Step 1. Let e1 , . . . , en be representatives of the Gv -orbits of edges adjacent to v with
trivial G-stabiliser. There exists Φ P ϕ such that Gv “ FixpΦq and, for every i P
t1, . . . , nu, the edge ei is fixed by Φ.

Proof. We first claim that there exists m ą 0 such that, for every i P t1, . . . , nu, the
automorphism Ψm fixes ei . Indeed, by definition of a cylinder, all edge stabilisers in
C are commensurable. As Ψ fixes an edge in C, there exists m ą 0 such that Ψm


                                             39
fixes pointwise a finite subtree of C containing every vertex of C corresponding to the
endpoints of the edges ei in Vr0 . This proves the claim.
    Let i P t1, . . . , nu. By Claim 2, there exists Φi P ϕ which fixes ei . Since the G-
stabiliser of ei is trivial, the Gϕ -stabiliser of ei is cyclic. Thus, Φi and Ψm have a
common power, so that PerpΦi q “ PerpΨm q “ FixpΨq “ Gv . By Corollary 4.10, we have
PerpΦi q “ FixpΦi q “ Gv .
    Thus, for every i P t1, . . . , nu, there exists Φi P ϕ such that FixpΦi q “ Gv , Φi fixes ei
and Φi and Ψ have a common power. For any i, j P t1, . . . , nu, Φi and Φj differ by an
element gi,j of Gv “ FixpΦi q “ FixpΦj q. Then Φi sends ej to gi,j ej . So, for every p ą 0,
we have Φpi pej q “ gi,jp
                          ej . But Φi , Φj and Ψ have a common power, so there exists p0 ą 0
             p0
such that Φi pej q “ ej . As G is torsion free, this forces gi,j “ 1. Hence Φi “ Φj . Setting
Φ “ Φ1 , we see that Φ fixes every edge ei with i P t1, . . . , nu and its fixed subgroup is
equal to Gv . This proves the first step.                                                      ■

   Let Φ P ϕ be the representative given by Step 1. Let g P Gv and let i P t1, . . . , nu.
As Gv “ FixpΦq, we have Φpgei q “ gei , so that Φ fixes every edge in the Gv -orbit of ei .
Step 2. The automorphism Φ fixes every edge e adjacent to v such that Ge is nontrivial.

Proof. Let e be an edge adjacent to v such that Ge is nontrivial. Let w be the other
endpoint of e. By Lemma 5.5, the group Gw is a pG, Gq-free factor. Moreover, its G-
conjugacy class is fixed by Φ. Since Ge ‰ t1u, the group Gw is the only group in its
G-conjugacy class which contains Ge . Since Ge Ď FixpΦq, the group Gw is preserved by
Φ. As w is the only vertex in Vr0 fixed by Gw , we conclude that w and e are fixed by Φ.
This proves Step 2.                                                                   ■

    Combining both Steps 1 and 2, we see that the automorphism Φ satisfies the asser-
tions of the claim.

    Since S is fixed by ϕℓ , by Proposition 5.6, a common refinement U of S and TcG pGϕℓ q
is obtained by blowing-up trees at cylinder vertices of TcG pGϕℓ q (we consider U as a G-
splitting and not a Gϕℓ -splitting). Let Vr be the set of vertices in Vr1 which are blown-up
when passing from TcG pGϕℓ q to U . By Claim 3, for every v P Vr , the automorphism ϕ
has a representative Φv which pointwise fixes Gv and which fixes every edge of TcG pϕℓ q
adjacent to v. The automorphism Φv therefore fixes every G-tree obtained from TcG pϕℓ q
by blowing-up a subtree at v. In particular, U is preserved by ϕ.
    We claim that ϕ acts trivially on GzU . Indeed, let pU : U Ñ TcG pGϕℓ q be the natural
G-equivariant projection and let x be a point in TcG pGϕℓ q. If p´1   U pxq is a point, then,
by Claim 2 and the G-equivariance of pU , ϕ preserves the G-orbit of p´1                ´1
                                                                            U pxq. If pU pxq
is not reduced to a point, then x P Vr . By Claim 3, ϕ has a representative which fixes
pointwise p´1
            U pxq. It follows that ϕ fixes pointwise GzU .
    Therefore, ϕ preserves every pG, G)-splitting on which U collapses. Since U is a
refinement of S, this shows that ϕ preserves S.



                                               40
5.2   Laminations and nonsporadic free factor systems
Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions and let ϕ P OutpG, Gq. Let
Fmax pϕq be the set of all proper, maximal ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free factor systems. The set
Fmax pϕq has a partition                        ž
                                Fmax pϕq “ Spϕq    NSpϕq,
where Spϕq contains all the pG, Gq-free factor systems in Fmax pϕq which are sporadic and
NSpϕq contains all the pG, Gq-free factor systems in Fmax pϕq which are nonsporadic. In
this section, we focus on the action of ϕ on NSpϕq. The main result of the section is the
following proposition.

Proposition 5.7. Let G be a group which satisfies the Standing Assumptions. Let ϕ P
IApG, G, 3q and let F P NSpϕq. Then F is fixed by ϕ.

    The proof of Proposition 5.7 uses the existence of attracting laminations associated
with ϕ. An attracting lamination is a particular closed subset of the double boundary
of G which is invariant by a power of a representative of ϕ. We in particular show
(see Lemma 5.11) that, to any maximal ϕ-periodic nonsporadic free factor system one
can canonically associate an attracting lamination of ϕ. Thus, instead of studying the
dynamics of ϕ on its periodic nonsporadic free factor systems, we will study the dynamics
of ϕ on its set of attracting laminations. This is well-described using a relative train track
representative of ϕ given by Theorem 2.21.

    First, we explain the necessary background relevant to the study of attracting lamina-
tions. Let ϕ P OutpG, Gq. Following the work of Bestvina–Feighn–Handel [BFH1, BFH3]
in the context of free groups, Lyman [Lym1] introduced a set Lpϕq of laminations asso-
ciated with ϕ, called the set of attracting laminations of ϕ. Instead of giving a precise
definition of an attracting lamination (we refer to [Lym1, Section 4] instead), we present
several properties of Lpϕq and its links with relative train tracks representing ϕ.
    Let F : T Ñ T be a relative train track representative of ϕ given by Theorem 2.21.
We now record several properties of the set Lpϕq.

Lemma 5.8 ([Lym1, Lemma 4.4]). Let pG, Gq be a free product, let ϕ P OutpG, Gq and let
F : T Ñ T be a relative train track representative of ϕ. The following hold.

 (1) For every attracting lamination Λ P Lpϕq, there exists a line ℓΛ of B 2 pG, Gq such
     that Λ is the minimal lamination of B 2 pG, Gq containing ℓΛ . Such a line ℓΛ is called
     a generic line of Λ.

 (2) For every Λ P Lpϕq, there exists an EG stratum Hr such that, for every generic
     line ℓΛ of Λ, the stratum Hr is the highest stratum crossed by ℓΛ .

 (3) Let Λ P Lpϕq and let Hr be the associated EG stratum. There exists an edge
     e P EHr and a generic line ℓΛ of Λ such that, for any finite subpath γ of ℓΛ , there
     exist n ą 0 and g P G such that γ Ď grF n peqs.


                                             41
    Lemma 5.8p2q implies that there exists a ϕ-equivariant map pϕ : Lpϕq Ñ EG, where
EG is the set of EG strata of T . We now describe properties of this map.
    Let Hr be an EG stratum. The stratum Hr is aperiodic if its associated transition
matrix Mr is aperiodic, that is there exists ℓ ą 0 such that every entry of Mrℓ is positive.
If Hr is not aperiodic, we have the following, whose proof is due to Lyman [Lym1]. We
add a sketch of proof as the exact assertion is not explicitly written.
Lemma 5.9 ([Lym1, Proof of Lemma 4.6]). Let pG, Gq be a free product, let ϕ P OutpG, Gq
and let F : T Ñ T be a relative train track representative of ϕ. Let Hr P EG be a non
aperiodic EG stratum.
   There exists a G-invariant partition
                                               prq
                                     EHr “ P1 > . . . Pnprq
                                                         r


of the edges of Hr such that the following hold.
                                                               prq
 (1) For every i P t1, . . . , nr u and every edge e P Pi            the path rF peqs is contained in
              prq
     Tr´1 Y Pi`1 , where indices are taken modulo nr .

 (2) For any distinct i, j P t1, . . . , nr u, we have
                                              prq                       prq
                                 FpTr´1 Y Pi q ‰ FpTr´1 Y Pj q.

Sketch of proof. The partition of EHr comes from general theory [Sen] applied to the
set of edges of GzHr and its transition matrix. The second assertion follows from the
                                                                                   prq
fact that there exists s ą 0 such that, for every i P t1, . . . , nr u, the set Pi is the set of
edges of an aperiodic EG stratum of the relative train track map F s : T Ñ T (see [Lym1,
                                                                                       prq
Proof of Lemma 4.6]). The fact that, for every i P t1, . . . , nr u the stratum Pi is an EG
stratum for F s implies that for any distinct i, j P t1, . . . , nr u, there exists g P G which is
                      prq                                         prq
both pG, FpTr´1 Y Pi qq-peripheral and pG, F pTr´1 Y Pj qq-nonperipheral. Indeed, it
suffices to take any nontrivial element in the fundamental group of the graph of groups
                 prq                                                    prq                prq
π1 pGzpTr´1 Y Pi qq whose associated reduced path crosses Pi (it exists as Pi is an
                                             prq                       prq
EG stratum). This shows that FpTr´1 Y Pi q ‰ FpTr´1 Y Pj q.

Proposition 5.10 ([Lym1]). Let pG, Gq be a free product, let ϕ P OutpG, Gq and let F : T Ñ
T be a relative train track representative of ϕ. The following hold.

 (1) [Lym1, Lemma 4.3] The application pϕ : Lpϕq Ñ EG is surjective.

 (2) [Lym1, Proof of Lemma 4.6] If Hr P EG is aperiodic, then |p´1
                                                                ϕ pHr q| “ 1.

 (3) [Lym1, Proof of Lemma 4.6] Suppose that Hr P EG is not aperiodic and let
                 prq            prq
     EHr “ P1 > . . . Pnr be the associated partition given by Lemma 5.9. For ev-
     ery i P t1, . . . , nr u, there exists a unique Λ P p´1
                                                          ϕ pHr q such that some (equivalently
                                                         prq
      any) generic line of Λ contains edges of Pi .

                                               42
 (4) [Lym1, Lemma 4.6] The set Lpϕq is finite.

 (5) [Lym1, Proof of Lemma 4.6] For every ℓ ą 0, we have Lpϕℓ q “ Lpϕq.

Lemma 5.11. Let pG, Gq be a free product and let ϕ P OutpG, Gq. For every F P NSpϕq,
there exists a unique ΛF P Lpϕq such that ΛF Ę B 2 pF, Gq. In particular, the map
ρϕ : NSpϕq Ñ Lpϕq sending F to ΛF is ϕ-equivariant.

Proof. Let F P NSpϕq. Let ℓ ą 0 be such that ϕℓ preserves F. Let F ℓ : T Ñ T be a
relative train track representing ϕℓ , and a filtration T0 Ď . . . Ď Tn such that there exists
an element Tr´1 of the filtration of T with FpTr´1 q “ F .
    Note that, since F is maximal, ϕℓ is fully irreducible relative to F. In particular,
one may choose the relative train track F ℓ : T Ñ T so that r “ n. Moreover, since F is
nonsporadic, the stratum Hr is an EG stratum.
    We claim that Hr is aperiodic. Indeed, suppose towards a contradiction that Hr is
not aperiodic and let
                                              prq
                                   EHr “ P1 > . . . Pnprqr

be the associated partition of edges given by Lemma 5.9, with nr ě 2. Recall that F ℓ
                                         prq       prq
induces a permutation of the set tP1 , . . . , Pnr u. Then F ℓnr ! preserves every element of
          prq          prq
the set tP1 , . . . , Pnr u. Thus, F ℓnr ! preserves a proper filtration

                          T1 Ď . . . Ď Tr´1 Ď Tr,1 Ĺ . . . Ĺ Tr,nr “ T

of T .
     Recall that, by Proposition 5.10p3q, for every i P t1, . . . , nr u, one may associate an
attracting lamination Λi to Tr,i . Moreover, by Lemma 5.8, for every generic line ℓ of
Λi , ℓ crosses Tr,i . Thus, there do not exist a generic line ℓ of Λi and a conjugacy class
rAs P F “ F pTr´1 q such that ℓ P B 2 pA, G|A q. Therefore, for every i P t1, . . . , nr u, we have
F “ FpTr´1 q ă F pTr,i q. Since nr ě 2, by Lemma 5.9p2q, for every i P t1, . . . , nr ´ 1u,
we have FpTr,i q ă trGsu. In particular, one may find a proper ϕℓ -periodic pG, Gq-free
factor system F Ę F 1 . This contradicts the maximality of F . Hence Hr is aperiodic.
     Thus, by Proposition 5.10p2q one can associate to F an attracting lamination of
Lpϕℓ q “ Lpϕq by sending F to the unique attracting lamination ΛF associated with
Hr . This attracting lamination does not depend on the choice of the relative train track
because of the following facts. Note that Hr is the unique EG stratum which is not
contained in Tr´1 . Therefore, by Lemma 5.8, a generic line of an attracting lamination
Λ P Lpϕq is contained in Tr´1 if and only if Λ ‰ ΛF . As F pTr´1 q “ F, this implies that
Λ Ď B 2 pF, Gq if and only if Λ ‰ ΛF . Thus the attracting lamination ΛF only depends
on F and we have a well-defined ϕ-equivariant map ρϕ : NSpϕq Ñ Lpϕq.

    We now describe the preimage of a lamination by ρϕ . We first need some technical
lemmas. The first one, called the bounded cancellation lemma is well-known to experts.
Its proof in the free group case is due to Cooper [Coo, Bounded Cancellation].



                                                43
Lemma 5.12 ([Lym1, Lemma 1.8]). Let pG, Gq be a free product, let ϕ P OutpG, Gq, let T
be a Grushko pG, Gq-free splitting and let F : T Ñ T be a morphism associated with ϕ.
There exists a constant CpF q ě 0 such that for any reduced path ρ “ ρ1 ρ2 in T we have

                      ℓprF pρqsq ě ℓprF pρ1 qsq ` ℓprF pρ2 qsq ´ 2CpF q.

    The second lemma deals with iterates by a relative train track of a legal subpath
in some illegal path. It is implicit in the work of Bestvina–Feighn–Handel [BFH1,
Lemma 5.5] in the free group case.

Lemma 5.13 ([FMS, Corollary 6.1.8]). Let pG, Gq be a nonsporadic free product. Let
ϕ P OutpG, Gq be fully irreducible and let F : T Ñ T be a relative train track map for
ϕ. Let g P G be pG, Gq-nonperipheral and let Lg Ď T be the associated geodesic line.
Suppose that the sequence tℓT pϕn prgsqunPN is unbounded. For every C ą 0, there exists
M ą 0 such that the reduced path rF M pLg qs contains a legal subpath of length greater
than C.

    Let F P NSpϕq and let ℓ ą 0 be the minimal integer such that ϕℓ pFq “ F . By
maximality of F, the outer automorphism ϕℓ , considered as an element of OutpG, F q, is
fully irreducible relative to F. We denote by TF the R-tree equipped with a G-action
given by Theorem 2.22. Let AF be the set of conjugacy classes of nontrivial point
stabilisers in TF .

Lemma 5.14. Let Λ P Lpϕq.

 (1) Let F, F 1 P ρ´1                1
                   ϕ pΛq. Every pG, F q-peripheral element is elliptic in TF .

 (2) For any F, F 1 P ρ´1
                       ϕ pΛq, we have AF “ AF 1 .

 (3) Suppose that G satisfies the Standing Assumptions. Suppose that ϕ P IApG, G, 3q
     and that ϕpΛq “ Λ. Then ϕ fixes elementwise ρ´1
                                                  ϕ pΛq.

Proof. The first statement of Lemma 5.14 is stable under taking powers of ϕ, so we may
suppose that ϕpFq “ F and ϕpF 1 q “ F 1 .
    Suppose towards a contradiction that there exists a pG, F 1 q-peripheral element g
which is not elliptic in TF . Let F : T Ñ T be a train track representative of the fully
irreducible outer automorphism ϕ P OutpG, Fq and let λ be its Perron–Froebenius eigen-
value. Up to taking a power of ϕ, we may suppose that λ ą 2. By Theorem 2.22, we
have ℓTF pgq “ limnÑ8 λ1n ℓT pϕn prgsqq.
    Let CpF q be the bounded cancellation constant for F given by Lemma 5.12. Since
ℓTF pgq ą 0, the sequence tℓT pϕn prgsqunPN is unbounded. By Lemma 5.13, there exists
M ą 0 such that, rF M pLg qs contains a legal subpath γ of length greater than 2CpF q ` 1.
    Write γ “ σ1 eσ2 , where ℓpσ1 q, ℓpσ2 q ě CpF q and e is a nontrivial edge. Since γ
is legal, for every n P N, the path rF n pγqs has length greater than λn p2CpF q ` 1q ě
2n p2CpF q ` 1q and there exist reduced paths γ1n , γ2n of lengths at least 2n CpF q such
that rF n pγqs “ γ1n rF n peqsγ2n . Since CpF q is the bounded cancellation constant of F , by


                                             44
Lemma 5.12, for every n P N, the subpath of rF n pγqs contained in rF n pLg qs is obtained
from rF n pγqs by erasing an initial and a terminal segment of length at most 2n CpF q. In
particular, for every n ě M , the path rF n´M peqs is contained in rF n pLg qs.
     Recall that T is a train track representative of a fully irreducible outer automorphism,
so that T has a unique stratum and its transition matrix is primitive. In particular, for
every edge e1 P ET and every n ě 0, there exists hn P G such that the path hn rF n pe1 qs is
contained in some reduced iterate of e by F . Thus, the edge e satisfies the conclusion of
Lemma 5.8p3q, that is, there exists a generic line ℓΛ of Λ such that any finite reduced edge
path in ℓΛ is contained in the G-orbit of some reduced iterate of e by F . As rF n´M peqs
is a subpath of rF n pLg qs for every n ě M , every finite subpath of ℓΛ is contained in the
G-orbit of some reduced iterate of Lg by F . Thus, for every open neighbourhood V of
ℓΛ , there exist n ě 1 and h P G such that hrF n pLg qs P V . This shows that the closure
GtrF n pLg qsunPN contains Λ “ GℓΛ .
     Since ϕpF 1 q “ F 1 and g is pG, F 1 q-peripheral, for every n P N, the line rF n pLg qs
represents an element in B 2 pF 1 , Gq. Since B 2 pF 1 , Gq is G-invariant and closed, we have

                             Λ Ď GtrF n pLg qsunPN Ď B 2 pF 1 , Gq.

This contradicts Lemma 5.11. Thus, every pG, F 1 q-peripheral element is elliptic in TF .
    We now prove the second assertion. Let F, F 1 P ρ´1    ϕ pΛq. We assume that F ‰ F as
                                                                                           1

otherwise the statement is immediate. The sets AF and AF 1 consist of conjugacy classes
of malnormal subgroups with trivial pairwise intersection as they are the set of point
stabilisers of an action of G on an R-tree with trivial arc stabilisers (see Theorem 2.22).
Hence, by malnormality of the groups in AF and AF 1 , it suffices to prove that, for every
rAs P AF , the group A is elliptic in TF 1 . A symmetric argument will then show that
for every rA1 s P AF 1 , the group A1 is elliptic in TF . This will conclude the proof of the
second assertion.
    By Theorem 2.22, there exists a (possibly trivial) cyclic subgroup H of G such that
AF “ F Y trHsu. By the first assertion, for every rAs P F, the group A is elliptic in TF 1 .
    We now prove that H is elliptic in TF 1 . Note that, by the first assertion, every
subgroup whose conjugacy class is in F 1 is elliptic in TF . Since F ‰ F 1 , and since F 1 is
maximal, we have F 1 Ę F. Since AF “ F Y trHsu, we see that H is pG, F 1 q-peripheral.
Thus, by Theorem 2.22, H is elliptic in TF 1 . This proves the second assertion.
    We finally prove the third assertion. Let F P ρ´1    ϕ pΛq. By the second assertion, the
                              ´1
set AF is an invariant of ρϕ pΛq, so that ϕ preserves AF .
    By Theorem 2.22, there exists a (possibly trivial) cyclic subgroup H of G such that
AF “ F Y trHsu. By Theorem 4.1, since H is cyclic and ϕ P IApG, G, 3q, we see that
ϕprHsq “ H, so that ϕpFq “ F . By Lemma 3.3, ϕ fixes elementwise F. By the second
assertion and Theorem 2.22, every element of ρ´1   ϕ pΛq is obtained by taking a finite subset
of AF . Therefore, we see that ϕ fixes elementwise ρ´1   ϕ pΛq.

   We now prove the main technical result of this section.
Proposition 5.15. Let G be a group satisfying the Standing Assumptions.              Let ϕ P
IApG, G, 3q and let Λ P Lpϕq. Then Λ is fixed by ϕ.

                                              45
Proof. The proof follows [HM1, Lemma II.4.2]. Let n be the size of the orbit of Λ
under iteration of ϕ. Let F : T Ñ T be a relative train track representative of ϕ. By
Proposition 5.10, there exists an EG stratum Hr with the following properties.

   • The top stratum crossed by every generic line of Λ is Hr .

   • If Hr is aperiodic, then n “ 1.

   • If Hr is not aperiodic, there exists a G-invariant partition
                                                    prq
                                       EHr “ P1 > . . . Pnprq
                                                           r

                                                                                            prq
      of the edges of Hr such that, for every i P t1, . . . , nr u and every edge e P Pi          the
                                            prq
      path rF peqs is contained in Tr´1 Y Pi`1 , where indices are taken modulo nr .

    Suppose towards a contradiction that nr ě 2. Note that, since F pTr´1 q “ Tr´1 , we
have ϕpF pTr´1 qq “ F pTr´1 q. By Lemma 3.3, ϕ fixes every element of FpTr´1 q, so that
F preserves every connected component of GzTr´1 . Let T 1 be the tree obtained from T
by collapsing every connected component of GzTr´1 to a point. Then the filtration of
T induces a filtration of T 1 . Let Xr be the underlying graph of GzTr1 and let Xr´1 be
the underlying graph of GzTr´1  1 . Then X
                                            r´1 is a set of vertices. Moreover, F induces
a homotopy equivalence F : Xr Ñ Xr which fixes every vertex of Xr´1 . Since ϕ acts
trivially on H1 pGzT , Z{3Zq by Lemma 3.6, it also acts trivially on H1 pXr , Z{3Zq.
                                                         prq
    The map F permutes the distinct graphs tTr´1 YPi uiPt1,...,nr u . Let i, j P t1, . . . , nr u
be distinct. By Lemma 5.9, we have
                             prq                 prq          prq       prq
                FpTr´1 Y Pi q ‰ FpTr´1 Y Pj q and EPi               X EPj     “ ∅.

                                                                              prq                 prq
Let Xi and Xj be the underlying subgraphs of Xr induced by Tr´1 YPi                 and Tr´1 YPj .
          prq      prq
Since EPi X EPj “ ∅ and since the partition of EHr is G-invariant, the intersection
Xi X Xj “ Xr´1 consists only of vertices.
Claim. Let i P t1, . . . , nr u. One of the following hold.

 (1) The graph Xi contains an embedded circle.

 (2) There exist two distinct vertices v, w P Xi corresponding to two distinct connected
     components of GzTr´1 such that v and w are joined by an arc in Xi .

Proof. Assume that Xi does not contain an embedded circle. Let Λi be the attracting
                                              prq
lamination of ϕ associated with Tr´1 Y Pi and let ℓi be a generic line for Λi . By
                                                prq
Proposition 5.10, the line ℓi crosses Tr´1 Y Pi , so that ℓi projects to an immersed line
ℓi in Xi which contains edges of Xi . Since ℓi is connected and immersed, and since there
is no embedded circle in Xi , some subpath of ℓi is an arc in Xi between two vertices of
Xi corresponding to two distinct connected components of GzTr´1 .

                                               46
    We now distinguish between the two cases of the claim. Suppose first that there exists
an embedded circle γ in Xi . Then γ induces a nontrivial element rγs P H1 pXr , Z{3Zq.
Moreover, since γ Ę Xr´1 and since Xi X Xj “ Xr´1 , any embedded circle in Xj will
induce an element of H1 pXr , Z{3Zq distinct from rγs. Since ϕ P IApG, G, 3q acts trivially
                                                                                            prq
on H1 pXr , Z{3Zq by Lemma 3.6, we see that F preserves Xi and that F preserves Pi ,
a contradiction.
    Suppose now that Xi has no embedded circle and that there exist two distinct vertices
v, w P V Xi corresponding to two distinct connected components of GzTr´1 such that v
and w are joined by an arc γi in Xi . This arc is unique as Xi does not contain any
                                                      m
embedded circle. For every m ą 0, the graph F pXi q “ Xi`m has a unique arc between
v and w since F fixes both v and w (here and thereafter, i ` m is taken modulo nr ).
    For m ě 0, let γi`m be the arc in Xi`m between v and w. Then γ “ tγi`m umPN is
an F -invariant subgraph of Xr with exactly two vertices, v and w, and nr arcs between
them. Since nr ě 2, the graph γ has no leaf. As ϕ P IApG, G, 3q it acts trivially on
H1 pXr , Z{3Zq. As γ is an F -invariant subgraph of Xr , we see that ϕ fixes pointwise
H1 pγ, Z{3Zq.
    By Lemma 3.6, either F is homotopy equivalent to the identity map on γ, or else
nr “ 2 and F is homotopy equivalent to a rotation. As F fixes v and w, in both cases,
we see that F is homotopy equivalent to the identity map on γ. This shows that, for
any distinct i, j P t1, . . . , nr u, the graph Xi cannot be sent to Xj by F , a contradiction.
    Thus, Hr is aperiodic and ϕ acts trivially on Lpϕq.

Proof of Proposition 5.7. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q and let F be a maximal ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-
free factor system which is nonposradic. By Lemma 5.11, there exists a unique lamination
ΛF associated with F . Moreover, by Lemma 5.14p3q, F is fixed by ϕ if and only if ΛF
is fixed by ϕ. The result now follows from Proposition 5.15.

   We now have all the necessary tools to prove Theorem 5.1.

Proof of Theorem 5.1. Let ϕ P IApG, G, 3q and let F be a ϕ-periodic proper pG, Gq-
free factor system. We prove by induction on ξpG, Gq that F is fixed by ϕ. The case
ξpG, Gq “ 1 is immediate since in this case either F “ trGsu or else G “ Z and ϕ “ Id.
    Suppose that ξpG, Gq ě 2. Let F 1 be a maximal proper ϕ-periodic pG, Gq-free factor
system such that F Ď F 1 . We claim that F 1 is fixed by ϕ. Indeed, if F 1 is nonsporadic,
this follows from Proposition 5.7. If F 1 is sporadic, it induces a canonical pG, Gq-free
splitting TF 1 . By Theorem 5.2, the free splitting TF 1 is fixed by ϕ. Hence F 1 is fixed by
ϕ.
    In both cases, the pG, Gq-free factor system F 1 is fixed by ϕ. Let rAs P F 1 . By
Lemma 3.3, the conjugacy class rAs is fixed by ϕ. Moreover, since A is a pG, Gq-free
factor, by Lemma 3.9, the outer automorphism ϕ|A of OutpAq induced by ϕ is contained
in IApA, G|A , 3q. Let F|A be the pA, G|A q-free factor system induced by F . By induction,
we see that F|A is fixed by ϕ|A . Since F Ď F 1 , for every rHs P F, there exist rAs P F 1
and g P G such that gHg ´1 Ď A and rgHg ´1 sA P F|A . Thus there exists Φ|A P ϕ|A



                                              47
which preserves gHg ´1 . As ΦA is the restriction to A of some Φ P ϕ, the automorphism
Φ preserves gHg ´1 . Therefore, we see that F is fixed by ϕ.


6     Aperiodic finite index subgroups of outer automorphism groups
      of toral relatively hyperbolic groups
Let H be a toral relatively hyperbolic group, that is a torsion free hyperbolic group
relative to a finite set P of finitely generated abelian groups. In this section, we show
that H satisfies the Standing Assumptions (see in particular Corollary 6.7). Note that
the hypotheses are only related to the one-ended factors of the Grushko decomposition
of H, so we may assume that H is one-ended. We split the proof into two sections,
whether H is free abelian or not.

6.1   Finitely generated free abelian groups
Let n ą 0. Consider the group GLn pZq “ AutpZn q “ OutpZn q. Let IApZn , 3q be the
kernel of the natural homomorphism

                                  GLn pZq Ñ GLn pZ{3Zq,

that is, IApZn , 3q is the level 3 principal congruence subgroup of GLn pZq. The group
IApZn , 3q is torsion free. Recall that the periodic subgroup PerpΦq of Φ is the subgroup
of Zn consisting of all Φ-periodic elements.
Proposition 6.1. Suppose that Φ P IApZn , 3q. Then every element of the periodic subgroup
of Φ is fixed by Φ.
Proof. Note that, for every m ą 0 and every v P Zn , the element v has at most one m-th
root. This implies that the subgroup PerpΦq is root–closed, so a direct summand of Zn .
   Therefore, the image of Φ in AutpPerpΦqq given by restriction is a finite order auto-
morphism contained in IApPerpΦq, 3q. Since IApPerpΦq, 3q is torsion free, the image of
Φ in AutpPerpΦqq is trivial. Therefore, Φ acts trivially on PerpΦq and every element of
the periodic subgroup of Φ is fixed by Φ.

6.2   One-ended toral relatively hyperbolic groups
Let H be a nonelementary one-ended toral relatively hyperbolic group and let P be its
peripheral structure. Then P consists of finitely generated free abelian groups. Note
that, in this case, elementary subgroups of H are free abelian. The aim of this section is to
construct a finite index subgroup of OutpHq satisfying the Standing Assumptions. First,
we need some general lemmas regarding vertex stabilisers of an elementary splitting. It is
similar to [GL2, Lemma 3.8], but the later is only written for JSJ elementary splittings.
Lemma 6.2. Let H be a toral one-ended relatively hyperbolic group, let P be its peripheral
structure and let S be an pH, Pq-elementary splitting. For every v P V S, the group Hv
is toral relatively hyperbolic.

                                             48
    Let Pv be the set of maximal parabolic subgroups contained in Hv and let Incv be the
set of incident edge stabilisers. A peripheral structure of Hv is Pv Y Incv .

Proof. Since edge stabilisers are elementary, by [GL2, Proposition 3.4], vertex stabilisers
are relatively quasi-convex, hence they are toral relatively hyperbolic.
    We now explicit the peripheral structure of Hv . By [Hru, Theorem 9.1], a peripheral
structure of Hv is given by the groups Hv X gP g ´1 , with g P H and rP s P P. Since
gP g ´1 is elliptic in S and since edge stabilisers are elementary, either gP g ´1 Ď Hv , or
else gP g ´1 X Hv is an edge stabiliser. Conversely, any edge stabiliser in Incv which is
not equal to some Hv X gP g ´1 , with g P H and rP s P P is infinite cyclic. Such groups
may be added to the peripheral structure.

    By Theorem 2.13, there exists a canonical pH, Pq-elementary splitting TP preserved
by AutpHq and OutpHq.
    Let Out0 pHq be the finite index subgroup of OutpHq acting trivially on the quotient
graph HzTP and fixing the conjugacy class of every group in P. We have natural
restriction homomorphisms
                                              ź
                             pVH : Out0 pHq Ñ      OutpHv q
                                                  vPV TP

and                                                   ź
                             pE      0
                              H : Out pHq Ñ                OutpHe q.
                                                  ePETP
                                                           1
    By Theorem 2.13p7q, the image of pE                                 E
                                       H is finite. Let Out pHq “ kerppH q. The next
                                  V
lemma describes the kernel of pH , and applies more generally for elementary splittings
of toral relatively hyperbolic group.

Lemma 6.3. Let H be a nonelementary one-ended toral relatively hyperbolic group, let P
be its peripheral structure and let S be an pH, Pq-elementary splitting with the following
properties.

 (1) For every edge e P ES, there exists an endpoint v of e such that He is malnormal
     in Hv .

 (2) For every edge e P ES, there exists an endpoint v of e such that Hv is abelian.

The kernel T pSq of the natural homomorphism
                                       ź
                                KpSq Ñ     OutpHv q,
                                              vPV S

is a finitely generated free abelian group.

Proof. We use the definitions and notations from [GL2]. Since every edge group is
malnormal in the stabiliser of one of its endpoints, by [GL2, Lemma 2.12 (2)], the group
T pSq is the group of twists of S (see [Lev]).

                                               49
    The rest of the proof follows [GL2, Proof of Corollary 4.4]. Since H is nonelementary,
its centre is trivial (see for instance ś
                                        [Far]). Thus, by [Lev, Proposition 3.1], the group
T pSq is isomorphic to a quotient of ePEpHzSq
                                            ⃗
                                                                      ⃗
                                                  CHopeq pHe q (where EpHzSq   is the set of
oriented edges of HzS) by the image of the natural diagonal map
                   ź                ź                  ź
              j:         ZpHv q ˆ         ZpHe q Ñ          CHopeq pHe q.
                  vPV pHzSq           ePEpHzSq            ⃗
                                                        ePEpHzSq

Let v P V pHzSq and let e be an edge of HzS adjacent to v. Suppose that Hv is
nonelementary. Then Hv is not abelian and He is malnormal in Hv by Lemma 6.2.
Moreover, the centre of Hv is trivial. Thus, we have CHv pHe q “ He and ś ZpHv q “ t1u.
    Hence, for every e P EpHzSq, the edge relation induced by jp ePEpHzSq ZpHe qq
identifiesśthe two copies of He coming from
                                         ś a chosen orientation of e. Moreover, the
group jp vPV pHzSq ZpHv qq is equal to jp vPV pHzSq, Hv abelian ZpHv qq.
    This shows that T pSq is isomorphic to the direct product
                                        ˜                ¸
                              ź            ź
                                                CHv pHe q {ZpHv q,
                      vPV pHzSq, Hv abelian   ePIncv


where ZpHv q embeds diagonally. Let v P V pHzSq with Hv`ś      abelian. Then, for ˘ every
e P Incv , we have CHv pHe q “ ZpHv q “ Hv , so that the group   ePIncv C Hv pHe q {ZpHv q
is free abelian.

   Let v P V TP . We now construct a finite index subgroup IApHv , 3q of the image of
Out1 pHq in OutpHv q.

Suppose that v is rigid.
   By Theorem 2.13p8q, the image of Out1 pHq is finite. We set IApHv , 3q “ tidu.

Suppose that v is elementary.
   In this case, there exists n ě 1 such that the group OutpHv q is isomorphic to GLn pZq.
Let IApHv , 3q be the intersection of the image of Out1 pHq with the level 3 principal
congruence subgroup of OutpHv q.

Suppose that v is flexible.
   By Theorem 2.13p5q, there exists a compact hyperbolic surface Σv such that the group
Hv is isomorphic to π1 pΣv q. Moreover, the image of Out1 pHq in OutpHv q is isomorphic
to MCGpΣv q, the mapping class group of Σv . By a result of Ivanov [Iva, Theorem 1.7],
there exists a finite index subgroup IApHv , 3q of MCGpΣv q with the following properties.

 (1) The group IApHv , 3q is torsion free.
 (2) For every ϕ P IApHv , 3q and every periodic subgroup Perpϕq of ϕ, we have ϕ P
     OutpHv , rPerpϕqsptq q.

                                               50
 (3) Suppose that K is the fundamental group of a subsurface of Σv . If the conjugacy
     class rKs of K is ϕ-periodic, then rKs is fixed by ϕ.

 (4) If Φ P AutpHv q is an automorphism whose image is contained in IApHv , 3q, then
     every Φ-periodic element of Hv is fixed by Φ.

     Let IA1 pH, 3q be the preimage in Out1 pHq of vPV TP IApHv , 3q. The group IA1 pH, 3q
                                                  ś

is a finite index subgroup of Out1 pHq, hence a finite index subgroup of OutpHq.
     Let IApH, 3q be the finite index subgroup of IA1 pH, 3q whose action on H1 pH, Z{3Zq
is trivial. We now prove that the group IApH, 3q satisfies the hypotheses of the Standing
Assumptions.

Lemma 6.4. The group IApH, 3q is torsion free.

Proof. Let F be a finite subgroup of IApH, 3q. Since pVH pIApH, 3qq is torsion free by
construction, the group F is contained in kerppVH q, which is a torsion free abelian group
by Lemma 6.3. Hence F “ t1u.

Proposition 6.5. Let ϕ P IApH, 3q and let H 1 Ď H be a ϕ-periodic finitely generated
subgroup. Then ϕ P OutpH, rH 1 sptq q.

Proof. Let H “ tϕℓ rH 1 suℓě0 . Since rH 1 s is ϕ-periodic, the set H is finite. Let TPYH
be the associated JSJ pH, P Y Hq-elementary splitting given by Theorem 2.13. Then
TPYH is preserved by ϕ. Moreover, the trees TP and TPYH are compatible by [GL1,
Theorem 9.18 (3)].
    Let U be the minimal common refinement of TP and TPYH (see [GL1, Proposi-
tion A.26]). The tree U has the following property. Let pP : U Ñ TP and let pPYH : U Ñ
TPYH be the natural H-equivariant projections. Then there does not exist an edge e
of U such that both pP peq and pPYH peq are vertices. By minimality, since ϕ preserves
both TP and TPYH , we see that ϕ preserves U and the projections pP and pPYH are
ϕ-equivariant.
Claim. The graph automorphism of HzTPYH induced by ϕ is trivial.

Proof. As usual, we want to apply Lemma 3.5. We proceed in several steps.
Step 1. Let v be a vertex of TPYH with nonelementary stabiliser. Then ϕ preserves the
H-orbit of v.

Proof. Since Hv is nonelementary, the vertex v is the unique point in TPYH fixed by Hv .
Thus, ϕ preserves the H-orbit of v if and only if ϕ preserves the H-conjugacy class of
Hv . We will frequently use this equivalence during the proof.
     Consider the preimage p´1                                     ´1
                               PYH pvq in U . Suppose first that pPYH pvq contains an edge
er. By equivariance of pPYH , if ϕ preserves the H-orbit of er, then ϕ preserves the H-orbit
of v, so we focus on the H-orbit of er. By minimality of U , denoting by ˚   er the interior of
                                                         ˚                 0
er, the projection pP restricts to a homeomorphism on er. Since ϕ P Out pHq, ϕ preserves


                                              51
the H-orbit of pP p˚erq. By equivariance of pP , ϕ preserves the H-orbit of er and hence the
H-orbit of v.
    Suppose now that p´1  PYH pvq is a vertex v
                                              r. Then Hvr “ Hv . Thus, Hv fixes the vertex
w “ pP pr
        v q of TP . Since Hv is nonelementary, so is w. We distinguish between two cases,
according to the nature of w.

Case 1. The vertex w is rigid.
    In this case, since ϕ P IApH, 3q, the outer automorphism ϕw P OutpHw q is trivial.
Thus, ϕ acts as a global conjugation on Hv Ď Hw . Therefore, ϕ preserves the H-orbit
of v.

Case 2. The vertex w is flexible.
     Then Hw is the fondamental group of a compact hyperbolic surface Σw . Moreover,
since elementary subgroups of Hw are cyclic, the minimal subtree UHw Ď p´1     P pwq of Hw
in U is an Hw -cyclic splitting. By [GL1, Proposition 5.4], the tree UHw is dual to a
decomposition of Σw along closed geodesics. Since ϕw P IApHw , 3q, this decomposition
is preserved by ϕw . Hence ϕw acts trivially on the graph Hw zUHw . As Hv Ď Hw , the tree
UHw contains the unique vertex vr of U fixed by Hv . Hence ϕw preserves the Hw -orbit
of vr, so that ϕ preserves the H-orbit of vr. Since Hvr “ Hv , ϕ preserves the H-conjugacy
class of Hv , hence the H-orbit of v. As we have ruled out every case, this concludes the
proof of Step 1.                                                                         ■
Step 2. The outer class ϕ fixes every leaf of HzTPYH .
Proof. Let v P V TPYH which projects to a leaf of HzTPYH . By Step 1, if Hv has
nonelementary stabiliser, then the H-orbit of v is fixed by ϕ.
    So we may suppose that Hv is elementary. Let e P ETPYH be an edge adjacent to
v. Since v projects to a leaf of HzTPYH , by minimality of the action of H on TPYH , we
have He Ĺ Hv . Hence Hv fixes a unique vertex of TPYH , so it suffices to prove that ϕ
preserves the H-conjugacy class of Hv .
    Suppose that rHv s P P. Since ϕ P Out0 pHq, we see that ϕ preserves rHv s. So the
only case remaining is when Hv is infinite cyclic. As H is one-ended, the group He has
finite index in Hv . Since TP and TPYH are compatible, the group He fixes a point in TP .
Since Hv is infinite cyclic, the group Hv also fixes a point w in TP . Hence Hv is a periodic
subgroup of ϕw P IApHw , 3q. By definition of IApHw , 3q, ϕ fixes the H-conjugacy class
of Hv . This concludes the proof of Step 2.                                                ■
    By Step 2, ϕ fixes every leaf of HzTPYH . Since ϕ P IApH, 3q, ϕ acts trivially on
H1 pH, Z{3Zq. By Lemma 3.6, ϕ acts trivially on H1 pHzTPYH , Z{3Zq. By Lemma 3.5,
ϕ acts trivially on HzTPYH or else HzTPYH is a circle and ϕ acts as a rotation on it.
Therefore, in order to show that ϕ acts trivially on HzTPYH , it suffices to prove that ϕ
fixes a point in HzTPYH .
    Since H is nonelementary, the tree TPYH contains a vertex with nonelementary sta-
biliser. By Step 1, ϕ fixes the H-orbit of this vertex. Thus, ϕ fixes a point in HzTPYH .
This concludes the proof of the claim.

                                             52
    By the claim, the outer automorphism ϕ acts trivially on HzTPYH . Since ϕ P
IApH, 3q, it also acts trivially on HzTP . Moreover, since every edge of U has nontrivial
image in either TP or TPYH , ϕ also acts trivially on the graph HzU .
    Let rKs P H. Then K fixes a point in TPYH . Since the action of K on TPYH is
acylindrical (Theorem 2.13p2q), its fixed point set is bounded. Let vK be the centre of
the fixed point set of K. Let ℓ ą 0 and let Φ P ϕℓ be such that ΦpKq “ K and Φ|K “ idK .
By uniqueness of vK , the automorphism Φ fixes vK . Thus, K is also a periodic subgroup
of ϕvK P OutpHvK q. This shows that, in order to prove Proposition 6.5, it remains to
prove that, for every v P V TPYH , and every finitely generated ϕv -periodic subgroup Hv1
of Hv such that rHv1 s P H, we have ϕv P OutpHv , rHv1 sptq q. We therefore fix a vertex
v P V TPYH and a ϕv -periodic finitely generated subgroup Hv1 Ď Hv such that rHv1 s P H.
Once again, we distinguish between several cases, according to the nature of v.

Case 1. Suppose that v is elementary noncyclic.
    Then Hv1 also fixes a point in TP . By Lemma 2.16, there exists a canonical point w
in TP fixed by Hv1 , so that any automorphism in ϕ which preserves Hv1 also preserves
Hw .
    Since ϕ P IApH, 3q, the image of ϕ in OutpHw q is contained in IApHw , 3q. In par-
ticular, for every ϕw -periodic finitely generated subgroup Hw1 of Hw , we have ϕw P
OutpHw , rHw1 sptq q. Thus, we have ϕw P OutpHw , rHv1 sptq q. Since Hv is malnormal in
H, any automorphism of Hw fixing Hv1 pointwise also preserves Hv . Thus, we have
ϕv P OutpHv , rHv1 sptq q.

Case 2. Suppose that v is rigid.
    By Theorem 2.13p8q, the outer automorphism ϕv of OutpHv q induced by ϕ is of
finite order. Let UHv Ď p´1PYH pvq be the minimal subtree of Hv in U (if Hv is elliptic,
we assume that UHv is the centre of the bounded fixed subtree of Hv ). The Hv -splitting
UHv is ϕv -invariant.
    We claim that ϕv acts trivially on Hv zUHv . Indeed, let e P EUHv . We need to prove
that ϕv peq is in the Hv -orbit of e. Since ϕ acts trivially on HzU , there exists h P H
such that ϕv peq “ he. But ϕv preserves UHv Ď p´1                             ´1
                                                     PYH pvq, so that e P EpPYH pvq and
he P Ep´1PYH pvq. By H-equivariant of pPYH , we have hv “ v and h P Hv . Hence ϕv
preserves the Hv -orbit of e and ϕv acts trivially on Hv zUHv . This proves the claim.
    The above claim implies that we have a restriction homomorphism
                                           ź
                                 xϕv y Ñ         OutpHw q.
                                        wPV UHv

    We claim that the kernel of the above homomorphism is a free abelian group. Indeed,
by Lemma 6.2, the group Hv is toral relatively hyperbolic. Let e P EUHv . By minimality
of U , since pPYH peq is a point, the image of e in TP is an edge. By Lemma 6.2, the
group He is malnormal in the endpoint of pP peq with nonelementary stabiliser. Then He
is malnormal in the vertex stabiliser of the endpoint of e which projects to it. Moreover,
one of the endpoints of e has abelian stabiliser since one of the endpoints of pP peq has

                                           53
abelian stabiliser. Thus, by Lemma 6.3, the kernel of the above homomorphism is free
abelian. Since xϕv y is a finite group, the above
                                             ś homomorphism is injective.
    We now prove that the image of ϕv in wPV UH OutpHw q is trivial. Let w P V UHv .
                                                      v
Then the group Hw is contained in the vertex stabiliser Hx of a vertex pP pwq “ x P V TP .
Since ϕ P IApH, 3q, for every ϕx -periodic finitely generated subgroup Hx1 of Hx , we have
ϕx P OutpHx , rHx1 sptq q. As the image of ϕv in OutpHw q is of finite order, the group Hw
is a ϕx -periodic subgroup. Since edge stabilisers in TP and TPYH are finitely generated
by Theorem 2.13p4q, edge stabilisers in U are finitely generated. Thus, the group Hw is
also finitely generated. Hence ϕx P OutpHx , rHw sptq q and the image of ϕv in OutpHw q is
trivial.
    Since the image of xϕv y in OutpHw q is trivial for every w P V UHv , the image of
                                            ź
                                   xϕv y Ñ        OutpHw q
                                        wPV UHv

is trivial. This shows that ϕv “ id.

Case 3. Suppose that v is flexible.
    By Theorem 2.13p5q, v is a QH vertex and the group Hv is the fondamental group of a
compact hyperbolic surface Σv . Moreover, the subgroup Hv1 is conjugate into a boundary
subgroup CHv1 of Σv . Then, it suffices to prove that ϕv preserves the conjugacy class of
a generator of CHv1 . We prove this fact using Lemma 4.7. In order to apply it, it suffices
to prove that for every e P ETPYH adjacent to v, the outer automorphism ϕe is trivial.
    Let e P ETPYH be adjacent to v. Note that He fixes a vertex x of TP since it fixes a
vertex of U . Let Φ P ϕ be such that Φpeq “ e. Then Φ fixes x by Φ-equivariance of pP .
Since every Φ|Hx -periodic element of Hx is fixed by Φ|Hx , a generator of He is fixed by
Φ, so that Φ fixes He elementwise. By Lemma 4.7, ϕv preserves the Hv -conjugacy class
of a generator of CHv1 .

Case 4. Suppose that Hv is infinite cyclic.
    Let e be an edge adjacent to v. Then He and Hv are commensurable. Thus, it suffices
to prove that ϕe is trivial. Let Φ P ϕ be such that Φpeq “ e, so that ΦpHe q “ He . Let
w be the endpoint of e distinct from v. Then w has nonelementary stabiliser, He Ď Hw
and ΦpHw q “ Hw .
    If w is rigid, by Case 2, Φ acts as a global conjugation on Hw . Since He is malnormal
in Hw by Lemma 6.2, we see that Φ fixes elementwise He .
    If w is flexible, then Hw is contained in a boundary subgroup of the surface Σw
associated with w. By Case 3, ϕ preserves the Hw -conjugacy class of a generator of every
boundary component of Σw . In particular, Φ fixes a generator of He . This concludes
the proof of the last case and the proof of the proposition.

Proposition 6.6. Let H be a one–ended toral relatively hyperbolic group. Let Φ P AutpHq
with ϕ “ rΦs P IApH, 3q. Every Φ-periodic element of H is fixed by Φ.


                                            54
Proof. Recall that PerpΦq is the periodic subgroup of Φ. Then PerpΦq is finitely gener-
ated by [AGH, Theorem 5.22]. Let H “ trPerpΦqsu and let TPYH be the corresponding
JSJ pH, P Y Hq-elementary splitting given by Theorem 2.13. Then TPYH is preserved by
Φ. Since the action of H on TPYH is acylindrical (Theorem 2.13p2q), the group PerpΦq
fixes a bounded subtree T in TPYH . Thus, its centre v P V T is fixed by PerpΦq and Hv
is preserved by Φ. As before, we examine all possible cases.
    Suppose that v is parabolic. By Proposition 6.1, since ϕ P IApH, 3q, we have PerpΦq “
FixpΦq.
    If v is rigid, then the outer automorphism ϕv of Hv induced by ϕ is finite. By
Proposition 6.5, we have ϕ P OutpH, rHv sptq q. As Hv is nonelementary, v is the unique
fixed point of Hv , so that any automorphism in ϕ fixing Hv elementwise also fixes v.
This shows that ϕv is the trivial outer automorphism. Thus, Φ acts on Hv by a global
conjugation by an element hv of Hv . Since H is toral relatively hyperbolic, the centraliser
of a subgroup is root-closed and abelian. As a power of hv centralises PerpΦq, we see
that hv centralises PerpΦq and Φ fixes pointwise PerpΦq.
Claim. Suppose that PerpΦq is contained in a cyclic subgroup C of H preserved by Φ.
Then Φ fixes C and PerpΦq elementwise.

Proof. Let t be a generator of C. By Proposition 6.5, Φ preserves the H-conjugacy
class of t. Since H is toral relatively hyperbolic, there does not exists h P H such that
hth´1 “ t´1 . In particular, Φ fixes C and PerpΦq elementwise.

   The claim therefore deals with the case where Hv is infinite cyclic.
   Finally, suppose that v is flexible and let Σv be the associated compact surface. Then
PerpΦq is contained in a boundary subgroup C of Σv and C is preserved by Φ. By the
Claim, Φ fixes PerpΦq elementwise. This concludes the proof.

   We then obtain the following immediate corollary, which implies Theorem 1.1.

Corollary 6.7. Let G be a toral relatively hyperbolic group. There exists a finite index
subgroup IApG, 3q of OutpGq with the following properties.

 (1) The group IApG, 3q is torsion free.

 (2) For every ϕ P IApG, 3q and every ϕ-periodic finitely generated subgroup H Ď G, we
     have ϕ P OutpG, rHsptq q.

 (3) If ϕ P IApG, 3q, every ϕ-periodic conjugacy class of G-free factors is fixed by ϕ.

 (4) If ϕ P IApG, 3q, every ϕ-periodic G-free splitting is fixed by ϕ.

 (5) If Φ P AutpGq is such that rΦs P IApG, 3q, every Φ-periodic element of G is fixed
     by Φ.




                                            55
Proof. Let G “ G1 ˚. . .˚Gk ˚FN be the Grushko decomposition of G and let i P t1, . . . , ku.
By Lemma 6.4 and Propositions 6.5 and 6.6, the group OutpGi q has a finite index
subgroup satisfying the Standing Assumptions. The assertions of Corollary 6.7 then
follow from Theorems 4.1, 5.1, 5.2 and Corollary 4.10.


References
[AGH] N. Andrew, Y. Guerch, and S. Hughes. Suspensions of relatively hyperbolic
      groups and the Farrell–Jones Conjecture. Preprint [arXiv:2311.14036].

[Ali]   E. Alibegović. A combination theorem for relatively hyperbolic groups. Bull.
        London Math. Soc. 37 (2005) 459–466.

[BF]    M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. Hyperbolicity of the complex of free factors. Adv.
        Math. 256 (2014) 104–155.

[BFH1] M. Bestvina, M. Feighn, and M. Handel. Laminations, trees and irrreducible
       automorphisms of free groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 7 (1997) 215–244; erratum
       7 (1997) 1143–1143.

[BFH2] M. Bestvina, M. Feighn, and M. Handel. Solvable subgroups of OutpFn q are
       virtually abelian. Geom. Dedicata 104 (2004) 71–96.

[BFH3] M. Bestvina, M. Feighn, and M. Handel. The Tits alternative for OutpFn q I:
       Dynamics of exponentially growing automorphisms. Ann. of Math. 151 (2000)
       517–623.

[BFH4] M. Bestvina, M. Feighn, and M. Handel. The Tits alternative for OutpFn q II:
       A Kolchin type theorem. Ann. of Math. 161 (2005) 1–59.

[BH]    M. Bestvina and M. Handel. Train tracks and automorphisms of free groups.
        Ann. of Math. 135 (1992) 1–51.

[Bow1] B. Bowditch. Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic groups. Acta
       Math. 180 (1998) 145–186.

[Bow2] B. Bowditch. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Internat. J. Algebra Comput. (3) 22
       (2012).

[CHL]   T. Coulbois, A. Hilion, and M. Lustig. Non-unique ergodicity, observers’ topol-
        ogy and the dual lamination for R-trees. Illinois J. Math. 51 (2007) 897–911.

[Coo]   D. Cooper. Automorphisms of free groups have finitely generated fixed point sets.
        J. Algebra 111 (1987) 453–456.

[CT]    D.J. Collins and E.C. Turner. Efficient representatives for automorphisms of
        free products. Michigan Math. J. 41 (1994) 443–464.

                                             56
[CV]    M. Culler and K. Vogtmann. Moduli of graphs and automorphisms of free groups.
        Invent. Math. 84 (1986) 91–120.

[Dah1] F. Dahmani. Combination of convergence groups. Geom. Topol. 7 (2003) 933–
       963.

[Dah2] F. Dahmani. On suspensions and conjugacy of hyperbolic automorphisms. Trans.
       Amer. Math. Soc. 368 (2016) 5565–5577.

[DL]    F. Dahmani and R. Li. Relative hyperbolicity for automorphisms of free products
        and free groups. J. Topol. Anal. 14 (2022) 55–92.

[DS]    M.J. Dunwoody and M.E. Sageev. JSJ-splittings for finitely presented groups
        over slender groups. Invent. Math. 135 (1999) 25–44.

[DW]    M. Day and R.D. Wade. Relative automorphism groups of right-angled Artin
        groups. J. Topol. 12 (2019) 759–798.

[Far]   B. Farb. Relatively hyperbolic and automatic groups with applications to nega-
        tively curved manifolds. Ph.D thesis, Princeton university 1994.

[FH]    M. Feighn and M. Handel. The recognition theorem for OutpFn q. Groups Geom.
        Dyn. (1) 5 (2011) 39–106.

[Fio]   E. Fioravanti. Growth of automorphisms of virtually special groups. Preprint
        [arXiv:2501.12321].

[FM]    S. Francaviglia and A. Martino. Stretching factors, metrics and train tracks for
        free products. Illinois J. Math. 59 (2015) 859–899.

[FMS] S. Francaviglia, A. Martino, and D. Syrigos. On the action of relatively irre-
      ducible automorphisms on their train tracks. Preprint [arXiv:2108.01680], to
      appear in Ann. Ins. Fourier.

[FP]    K. Fujiwara and P. Papasoglu. JSJ-decompositions of finitely presented groups
        and complexes of groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 16 (2005) 70–125.

[GH1]   V. Guirardel and C. Horbez. Algebraic laminations for free products and ara-
        tional trees. Alg. Geom. Topol. (5) 19 (2019) 2283–2400.

[GH2]   V. Guirardel and C. Horbez. Boundaries of relative factor graphs and subgroup
        classification for automorphisms of free products. Geom. Topol. 26 (2022) 71–
        126.

[GH3]   V. Guirardel and C. Horbez. Measure equivalence rigidity of OutpFN q. Preprint
        [arXiv:2103.03696].

[GL1]   V. Guirardel and G. Levitt. JSJ decompositions of groups. Astérisque 395
        (2017), Soc. Math. France.

                                          57
[GL2]   V. Guirardel and G. Levitt. Splittings and automorphisms of relatively hyperbolic
        groups. Groups Geom. Dyn. (2) 9 (2015) 599–663.

[GL3]   V. Guirardel and G. Levitt. The outer space of a free product. Proc. London
        Math. Soc. 94 (2007) 695–714.

[GL4]   V. Guirardel and G. Levitt. Trees of cylinders and canonical splittings. Geom.
        Topol. 15 (2011) 977–1012.

[Gue]   Y. Guerch. Roots of outer automorphisms of free groups and centralizers of
        abelian subgroups of OutpFN q. Michigan Math. J. 75 (2025) 1003–1020.

[HK]    S. Hensel and D. Kielak. Nielsen realization by gluing: limit groups and free
        products. Michigan Math. J. (1) 67 (2018) 199–223.

[HM1] M. Handel and L. Mosher. Subgroup Decomposition in OutpFn q. Mem. Amer.
      Math. Soc. 264 (2020).

[HM2] M. Handel and L. Mosher. Virtually abelian subgroups of IAn pZ{3q are abelian.
      Michigan Math. J. 69 (2020) 465–485.

[Hor1] C. Horbez. The boundary of the outer space of a free product. Israel J. Math.
       (1) 221 (2017) 179–234.

[Hor2] C. Horbez. The Tits alternative for the automorphism group of a free product.
       Invent. Math. 240 (2025) 869–901.

[Hru]   G.C. Hruska. Relative hyperbolicity and relative quasiconvexity for countable
        groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol. 10 (2010) 1807–1856.

[Iva]   N. V. Ivanov. Subgroups of Teichmüller modular groups. Trans. Math. Mono.
        115, Amer. Math. Soc. (1992).

[Kid]   Y. Kida. Measure equivalence rigidity of the mapping class group. Ann. of Math.
        171 (2010) 1851–1901.

[Kor]   M. Korkmaz. Mapping class groups of nonorientable surfaces. Geom. Dedicata
        89 (2002) 109–133.

[Lev]   G. Levitt. Automorphisms of hyperbolic groups and graphs of groups. Geom.
        Dedicata. (1) 114 (2005) 49–70.

[Lym1] R.A. Lyman. CTs for free products. Preprint [arXiv:2203.08868].

[Lym2] R.A. Lyman. Train track maps on graphs of groups. Groups Geom. Dyn. 16
       (2022) 1389–1422.

[Mut]   J.P. Mutanguha.     On        polynomial   free-by-cyclic   groups.     Preprint
        [arXiv:2412.16150].

                                           58
[RS]    E. Rips and Z. Sela. Cyclic splittings of finitely presented groups and the canon-
        ical JSJ decomposition. Ann. of Math. (2) 146 (1997) 53–109.

[Sel]   Z. Sela. Structure and rigidity in (Gromov) hyperbolic groups and discrete groups
        in rank 1 Lie groups. II. Geom. Funct. Anal. 7 (1997) 561–593.

[Sen]   E. Seneta. Nonnegative matrices and Markov chains. Springer Series in Statis-
        tics. Springer-Verlag, New York, second edition, 1981.

[Ser]   J.-P. Serre. Rigidité du fondeur de Jacobi d’échelon n ě 3. Sem. H. Cartan,
        1960/1961, Appendix to Exp. 17, 1961.

[Sta]   J.R. Stallings. On torsion-free groups with infinitely many ends. Ann. of Math.
        (2) 88 (1968) 312–334.

 Yassine Guerch
 Université Caen Normandie
 CNRS
 Normandie Univ
 LMNO UMR6139
 F-14000 CAEN, FRANCE
 e-mail: yassine.guerch@cnrs.fr




                                           59
