arXiv:math/0610880v1 [math.GR] 28 Oct 2006




                                                        Algebraic extensions in free groups
                                                             Alexei Miasnikov (alexeim@math.mcgill.ca)∗
                                                        Dept of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University and
                                                Dept of Mathematics and Computer Science, City University of New York


                                                               Enric Ventura (enric.ventura@upc.edu)†
                                                 Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya and Centre de Recerca Matemàtica


                                                                  Pascal Weil (pascal.weil@labri.fr)‡
                                                                 LaBRI (CNRS and Université Bordeaux-1)




                                                                                   Abstract
                                                       The aim of this paper is to unify the points of view of three re-
                                                   cent and independent papers (Ventura 1997, Margolis, Sapir and Weil
                                                   2001 and Kapovich and Miasnikov 2002), where similar modern ver-
                                                   sions of a 1951 theorem of Takahasi were given. We develop a theory
                                                   of algebraic extensions for free groups, highlighting the analogies and
                                                   differences with respect to the corresponding classical field-theoretic
                                                   notions, and we discuss in detail the notion of algebraic closure. We
                                                   apply that theory to the study and the computation of certain al-
                                                   gebraic properties of subgroups (e.g. being malnormal, pure, inert or
                                                   compressed, being closed in certain profinite topologies) and the corre-
                                                   sponding closure operators. We also analyze the closure of a subgroup
                                                   under the addition of solutions of certain sets of equations.
                                                ∗
                                                  Dept of Mathematics and Statistics – McGill University – Burnside Hall, room 915 –
                                             805 Sherbrooke West – Montréal, Quebec, Canada, H3A 2K6
                                                †
                                                  EPSEM, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya – Av. Bases de Manresa 61 – 73 08242
                                             Manresa, Barcelona – Spain
                                                ‡
                                                  LaBRI – 351 cours de la Libération – 33405 Talence Cedex – France




                                                                                       1
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                          2


1     Introduction
A well-known result by Nielsen and Schreier states that all subgroups of a
free group F are free. A non-specialist in group theory could be tempted to
guess from this pleasant result that the lattice of subgroups of F is simple,
and easy to understand. This is however far from being the case, and a
closer look quickly reveals the classical fact that inclusions do not respect
rank. In fact, the free group of countably infinite rank appears many times
as a subgroup of the free group of rank 2. There are also many examples of
subgroups H, K of F such that the rank of H ∩ K is greater than the ranks
of H and K. These are just a few indications that the lattice of subgroups
of F is not easy.
    Although the lattice of subgroups of free groups was already studied by
earlier authors, Serre and Stallings in their seminal 1977 and 1983 papers [14,
16], introduced a powerful new technique, that has since turned out to be
extremely useful in this line of research. It consists in thinking of F as
the fundamental group of a bouquet of circles R, and of subgroups of F
as covering spaces of R, i.e. some special types of graphs. With this idea
in mind, one can understand and prove many properties of the lattice of
subgroups of F using graph theory. These techniques are also very useful to
solve algorithmic problems and to effectively compute invariants concerning
subgroups of F .
    The present paper offers a contribution in this direction, by analyzing a
tool (an invariant associated to a given subgroup H ≤ F ) which is suggested
by a 1951 theorem of Takahasi [17] (see Section 2.3). The algorithmic con-
structions involved in the computation of this invariant actually appeared in
recent years, in three completely independent papers [20], [11] and [7], where
the same notion was invented in independent ways. In chronological order,
we refer:

    • to the fringe of a subgroup, constructed in 1997 by Ventura (see [20]),
      and applied to the study of maximal rank fixed subgroups of automor-
      phisms of free groups;

    • to the overgroups of a subgroup, constructed in 2001 by Margolis, Sapir
      and Weil (see [11]), and applied to improve an algorithm of Ribes-
      Zaleskii for computing the pro-p topological closure of a finitely gener-
      ated subgroup of a free group, among other applications; and

    • to the algebraic extensions constructed in 2002 by Kapovich and Mias-
      nikov (see [7]), in the context of a paper where the authors surveyed,
      clarified and extended the list of Stallings graphical techniques.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                           3


    Turner also used the same notion, restricted to the case of cyclic sub-
groups, in his paper [18] (again, independently) when trying to find examples
of test elements for the free group.
    The terminology and the notation used in the above mentioned papers are
different, but the basic concept – that of algebraic extension for free groups
– is the same. Although aimed at different applications, the underlying
basic result in these three papers is a modern version of an old theorem
by Takahasi [17]. It states that, for every finitely generated subgroup H of
a free group F , there exist finitely many subgroups H0 , . . . , Hn canonically
associated to H, such that every subgroup of F containing H is a free multiple
of Hi for some i = 0, . . . , n. The original proof was combinatorial, while the
proof provided in [20], [11] and [7] (which is the same up to technical details)
is graphical, algorithmic, simpler and more natural.
    The aim of this paper is to unify the points of view in [20], [11] and [7],
and to systematize the study of the concept of algebraic extensions in free
groups. We show how algebraic extensions intervene in the computation of
certain abstract closure properties for subgroups, sometimes making these
properties decidable. This was the idea behind the application of algebraic
extensions to the study of profinite topological closures in [11], but it can
be applied in other contexts. In particular, we extend the discussion of the
notions of pure closure, malnormal closure, inert closure, etc (a discussion
that was initiated in [7]).
    A particularly interesting application concerns the property of being clo-
sed under the addition of the solutions of certain sets of equations. In this
case, new results are obtained, and in particular one can show that the rank
of the closure of a subgroup H is at most equal to rk(H).
    The paper is organized as follows.
    In section 2, we remind the readers of the fundamentals of the representa-
tion of finitely generated subgroups of a free group F by finite labeled graphs.
This method, which was initiated by Serre and Stallings at the end of the
1970s, quickly became one of the major tools of the combinatorial theory
of free groups. This leads us to the short, algorithmic proof of Takahasi’s
theorem discussed above (see Section 2.3).
    Section 3 introduces algebraic extensions, essentially as follows: the alge-
braic extensions of a finitely generated subgroup H are the minimum family
that can be associated to H by Takahasi’s theorem. We also discuss the
analogies that arise between this notion of algebraic extensions and classical
field-theoretic notions, and we discuss in detail the corresponding notion of
algebraic closure.
    Section 4 is devoted to the applications of algebraic extensions. We show
that whenever an abstract property of subgroups of free groups is closed
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                             4


under free products and finite intersections, then every finitely generated
subgroup H admits a unique closure with respect to this property, which
is finitely generated and is one of the algebraic extensions of H. Examples
of such properties include malnormality, purity or inertness, as well as the
property of being closed for certain profinite topologies. In a number of
interesting situations, this leads to simple decidability results. Equations
over a subgroup, or rather the property of being closed under the addition
of solutions of certain sets of equations, provide another interesting example
of such an abstract property of subgroups, which we discuss in Section 4.4.
     Finally, in section 5, we collect the open questions and conjectures sug-
gested by previous sections.


2     Preliminaries
Throughout this paper, A is a finite non-empty set and F (A) (or simply F
if no confusion may arise) is the free group on A.
    In the algorithmic or computational statements on subgroups of free
groups, we tacitly assume that the free group F is given together with a
basis A, that the elements of F are expressed as words over A, and that
finitely generated subgroups of F are given to us by finite sets of generators,
and hence by finite sets of words.

2.1    Representation of subgroups of free groups
In his 1983 paper [16], Stallings showed how many of the algorithmic con-
structions introduced in the first half of the 20th century to handle finitely
generated subgroups of free groups, can be clarified and simplified by adopt-
ing a graph-theoretic language. This method has been used since then in a
vast array of articles, including work by the co-authors of this paper.
    The fundamental notion is the existence of a natural, algorithmically
simple one-to-one correspondence between subgroups of the free group F with
basis A, and certain A-labeled graphs – mapping finitely generated subgroups
to finite graphs and vice versa. This is nothing else than a particular case
of the more general covering theory for topological spaces, particularized to
graphs and free groups. We briefly describe this correspondence in the rest
of this subsection. More detailed expositions can be found in the literature:
see Stallings [16] or [20, 7] for a graph-oriented version, and see one of [4, 22,
11, 15] for a more combinatorial-oriented version, written in the language of
automata theory.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                          5


    By an A-labeled graph Γ we understand a directed graph (allowing loops
and multiple edges) with a designated vertex written 1, and in which each
edge is labeled by a letter of A. We say that Γ is reduced if it is connected
(more precisely, the underlying undirected graph is connected), if distinct
edges with the same origin (resp. with the same end vertex) have distinct
labels, and if every vertex v 6= 1 is adjacent to at least two different edges.
    In an A-labeled graph, we consider paths, where we are allowed to travel
backwards along edges. The label of such a path p is the word obtained
by reading consecutively the labels of the edges crossed by p, reading a−1
whenever an edge labeled a ∈ A is crossed backwards. The path p is called
reduced if it does not cross twice consecutively the same edge, once in one
direction and then in the other. Note that if Γ is reduced then every reduced
path labels a reduced word in F (A).
    The subgroup of F (A) associated with a reduced A-labeled graph Γ is the
set of (reduced) words, which label reduced paths in Γ from the designated
vertex 1 back to itself. One can show that every subgroup of F (A) arises in
this fashion, in a unique way. That is, for each subgroup H of F (A), there
exists a unique reduced A-labeled graph, written ΓA (H), whose set of labels
of reduced closed paths at 1 is exactly H.
    Moreover, if the subgroup H is given together with a finite set of gen-
erators {h1 , . . . , hr } (where the hi are non-empty reduced words over the
alphabet A ⊔ A−1 ), then one can effectively construct ΓA (H), proceeding as
follows. First, one constructs r subdivided circles around a common dis-
tinguished vertex 1, each labeled by one of the hi (and following the above
convention: an inverse letter, say a−1 with a ∈ A, in a word hi gives rise to
an a-labeled edge in the reverse direction on the corresponding circle). If hi
has length ni , then the corresponding circle has ni edges and ni − 1 vertices,
in addition to the vertex 1. Then, we iteratively identify identically labeled
pairs of edges starting (resp. ending) at the same vertex. One shows that
this process terminates, that it does not matter in which order identifications
take place, and that the resulting A-labeled graph is reduced and equal to
ΓA (H). In particular, it does not depend on the choice of a set of genera-
tors of H. Also, this shows that ΓA (H) is finite if and only if H is finitely
generated (see one of [16, 20, 4, 22, 11, 7, 15] for more details).

Example 2.1 Let A = {a, b, c}. The above procedure applied to the sub-
group H = haba−1 , aca−1 i of F (A) is represented in Figure 1, where the last
graph is ΓA (H).                                                            ⊔
                                                                            ⊓

   Let Γ and ∆ be reduced A-labeled graphs as above. A mapping ϕ from
the vertex set of Γ to the vertex set of ∆ (we write ϕ : Γ → ∆) is a morphism
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                           6

                                             c                            b
            a            a
   c              1               b                  a             a
                                                             1
            a            a
                                                 b

                                       a                 c
                              1


       Figure 1: Computing the representation of H = haba−1 , aca−1 i

of reduced (A-)labeled graphs if it maps the designated vertex of Γ to the
designated vertex of ∆ and if, for each a ∈ A, whenever Γ has an a-labeled
edge e from vertex u to vertex v, then ∆ has an a-labeled edge f from vertex
ϕ(u) to vertex ϕ(v). The edge f is uniquely defined since ∆ is reduced. We
then extend the domain and range of ϕ to the edge sets of the two graphs,
by letting ϕ(e) = f .
    Note that such a morphism of reduced A-labeled graphs is necessarily
locally injective (an immersion in [16]), in the following sense: for each
vertex v of Γ, distinct edges starting (resp. ending) at v have distinct images.
Further following [16], we say that the morphism ϕ : Γ → ∆ is a cover if it is
locally bijective, that is, if the following holds: for each vertex v of Γ, each
edge of ∆ starting (resp. ending) at ϕ(v) is the image under ϕ of an edge of
Γ starting (resp. ending) at v.
    The graph with a single vertex, called 1, and with one a-labeled loop for
each a ∈ A is called the bouquet of A circles. It is a reduced graph, equal
to ΓA (F (A)), and every reduced graph admits a trivial morphism into it.
One can show that a subgroup H of F (A) has finite index if and only if this
natural morphism from ΓA (H) to the bouquet of A circles is a cover, and
in that case, the index of H in F (A) is the number of vertices of ΓA (H).
In particular, it is easily decidable whether a finitely generated subgroup of
F (A) has finite index.
    This graph-theoretic representation of subgroups of free groups leads to
many more algorithmic results, some of which are discussed at length in
this paper. We will use some well-known facts (see [16]). If H is a finitely
generated subgroup of F (A), then the rank of H is given by the formula
                             rk(H) = E − V + 1,
where E (resp. V ) is the number of edges (resp. vertices) in ΓA (H). A
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                             7


more precise result shows how each spanning tree in ΓA (H) (a subtree of the
graph ΓA (H) which contains every vertex) determines a basis of H. It is also
interesting to note that if H and K are finitely generated subgroups of F (A),
then ΓA (H ∩ K) can be easily constructed from ΓA (H) and ΓA (K): one first
considers the A-labeled graph whose vertices are pairs (u, v) consisting of a
vertex u of ΓA (H) and a vertex v of ΓA (K), with an a-labeled edge from (u, v)
to (u′ , v ′) if and only if there are a-labeled edges from u to u′ in ΓA (H) and
from v to v ′ in ΓA (K). Finally, one considers the connected component of
vertex (1, 1) in this product, and we repeatedly remove the vertices of valence
1, other than the distinguished vertex (1, 1) itself, to make it a reduced A-
labeled graph.
    To conclude this section, it is very important to observe that if we change
the ambient basis of F from A to B, we may radically modify the labeled
graph associated with a subgroup H of F , see Example 2.2 below. In fact,
a clearer understanding of the transformation from ΓA (H) to ΓB (H) (put
otherwise: of the action of the automorphism group of F (A) on the A-labeled
reduced graphs) is one of the challenges of the field.

Example 2.2 Let F be the free group with basis A = {a, b, c}, and let
H = hab, acbai. Note that B = {a′ , b′ , c′ } is also a basis of F , where a′ = a,
b′ = ab and c′ = acba. The graphs ΓA (H) and ΓB (H) are depicted in
Figure 2.                                                                       ⊔
                                                                                ⊓

                         a
                1
                         b                      b′                 c′
               a                   c
                                                          1

                         b

                    Figure 2: The graphs ΓA (H) and ΓB (H)



2.2    Subgroups of subgroups
A pair of free groups H ≤ K is called an extension of free groups. If H ≤
M ≤ K are free groups then H ≤ M will be referred to as a sub-extension
of H ≤ K.
   If H ≤ K is an extension of free groups, we use the following shorthand
notation: H ≤fg K means that H is finitely generated; H ≤fi K means that
H has finite index in K; and H ≤ff K means that H is a free factor of K.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                             8


    Extensions can be characterized by means of the labeled graphs associated
with subgroups as in Section 2.1. We first note the following simple result
(see [11, Proposition 2.4] or [7, Section 4]).

Lemma 2.3 Let H, K be subgroups of a free group F with basis A. Then
H ≤ K if and only if there exists a morphism of labeled graphs ϕH,K from
ΓA (H) to ΓA (K). If it exists, this morphism is unique.

    Given an extension H ≤ K between subgroups of the free group with
basis A, certain properties of the resulting morphism ϕH,K have a natural
translation on the relation between H and K. For instance, it is not difficult
to verify that ϕH,K is a covering if and only if H has finite index in K (and the
index is the cardinality of each fibre). This generalizes the characterization
of finite index subgroups of F (A) given in the previous section.
    If ϕH,K is one-to-one (and that is, if and only if it is one-to-one on ver-
tices), then H is a free factor of K. Unfortunately, the converse is far from
holding since each non-cyclic free group has infinitely many free factors. Fur-
thermore, given K, the particular collection of free factors H ≤ff K such that
ϕH,K is one-to-one heavily depends on the ambient basis.
    We recall here, for further reference, the following well-known properties
of free factors (see [8] or [9]).

Lemma 2.4 Let H, K, L, (Hi )i∈I and (Ki )i∈I be subgroups of a free group
F.

  (i) If H ≤ff K ≤ff L, then H ≤ff L.
                                          T              T
 (ii) If Hi ≤ff Ki for each i ∈ I, then       i Hi ≤ff       i Ki .

In particular, if H is a free factor of each Ki , then H is a free factor of their
intersection; and an intersection of free factors of K is again a free factor of
K.

    Finally, in the situation H ≤ K, we say that K is an A-principal overgroup
of H if ϕH,K is onto (both on vertices and on edges). We refer to the set of all
A-principal overgroups of H as the A-fringe of H, denoted OA (H). As seen
later, this set strongly depends on A. The A-fringe of H is finite whenever
H is finitely generated.
    Principal overgroups were first considered under the name of overgroups
in [11] (see [22] as well). They also appeared later as principal quotients
in [7], and their first introduction is in the earlier [20], where OA (H) was
called the fringe of H, its orla in catalan. We shall use the phrase principal
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                            9


overgroup (to stress the fact that not every K containing H is a principal
overgroup of H) and fringe, omitting the reference to the basis A when there
is no risk of confusion. Both orla and overgroup justify the notation OA (H).
    Given a finitely generated subgroup H ≤ F (A), the fringe OA (H) is
computable: it suffices to compute ΓA (H), and to consider each equivalence
relation ∼ on the set of vertices of ΓA (H). Say that such an equivalence
relation ∼ is a congruence (with respect to the labeled graph structure of
ΓA (H)) if, whenever p ∼ q and there are a-labeled edges from p to p′ and
from q to q ′ (resp. from p′ to p and from q ′ to q), then p′ ∼ q ′ . Then each
congruence gives rise to a surjective morphism from ΓA (H) onto ΓA (H)/ ∼,
and hence to a principal overgroup K of H such that ΓA (K) = ΓA (H)/ ∼.
Moreover, each principal overgroup K ∈ OA (H) arises in this fashion. At
the time of writing, a computer program is being developed with the pur-
pose, among others, of efficiently computing the fringe of a finitely generated
subgroup of a free group (see [13]).

Example 2.5 Let F be the free group with basis A = {a, b, c}, and let
H = hab, acbai ≤ F (the graph ΓA (H) was constructed in Example 2.2).
Successively identifying pairs of vertices of ΓA (H) and reducing the result-
ing A-labeled graph in all possible ways, one concludes that ΓA (H) has six
congruences, whose corresponding quotient graphs are depicted in Figure 3.
    Thus the A-fringe of H consists on OA (H) = {H0 , H1, H2 , H3 , H4 , H5 },
where H0 = H, H1 = hab, ac, bai, H2 = hba, ba−1 , cbi, H3 = hab, ac, ab−1 , a2 i,
H4 = hab, aca, acbai and H5 = ha, b, ci = F (A).
    However, with respect to the basis B = {a, ab, acba} of F , the graph
ΓB (H) has a single vertex, and hence the B-fringe of H is much simpler,
OB (H) = {H}.                                                                  ⊔
                                                                               ⊓

    Finally we observe that, if H ≤fi F (A), then OA (H) consists of all the
extensions of H. Indeed, suppose that H ≤ K ≤ F (A) and H ≤fi F (A).
Since ΓA (H) is a cover of the bouquet of A circles (that is, each vertex of
ΓA (H) is the origin and the end of an a-labeled edge for each a ∈ A), the
range of ϕH,K is also a cover of the bouquet of A circles. It follows that
ϕH,K is onto, since ΓA (K) is connected, and so K ∈ OA (H). In particular,
if H ≤fi F (A), then OA (H) does not depend on A, in contrast with what
happens in general.

2.3    Takahasi’s theorem
Of particular interest to our discussion is the following 1951 result by Taka-
hasi (see [9, Section 2.4, Exercise 8], [17, Theorem 2] or [20, Theorem 1.7]).
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                          10

                 a
       1                   2
                 b                                  a             a
      a                     c               4            1,3           2
                                                    b             b
       4                   3                                      c
                 b
                                                                  b
                 a                      c                         a
       1                  2,4                   3        1,3          2,4
                 b                                                a
                                        b
                 a                                                b
                                                                  c
                      a
                                                          b
             1                      2
                      b
                 a              c                   a   1,2,3,4   c
                     3,4            b

                 Figure 3: The six quotients of ΓA (hab, acbai)

Theorem 2.6 (Takahasi) Let F (A) be the free group on A and H ≤ F (A)
a finitely generated subgroup. Then, there exists a finite computable collec-
tion of extensions of H, say H = H0 , H1 , . . . , Hn ≤ F (A) such that every
extension K of H, H ≤ K ≤ F (A), is a free multiple of one of the Hi .

   The original proof, due to M. Takahasi was combinatorial, using words
and their lengths with respect to different sets of generators. The geometrical
apparatus described in this section leads to a clear, concise and natural proof,
which was discovered independently by Ventura in [20] and by Kapovich and
Miasnikov in [7]. Margolis, Sapir and Weil, also independently considered the
same construction in [11] for a slightly different purpose. Finally, we note
that Turner considered a similar construction in the case of cyclic subgroups,
in his work about test words [18]. We now give this proof of Takahasi’s
theorem.

Proof. Let K be an extension of H, and let ϕH,K : ΓA (H) → ΓA (K) be the
resulting graph morphism. Note that the image of ϕH,K is a reduced subgraph
of ΓA (K), and let LH,K be the subgroup of F (A) such that ΓA (LH,K ) =
ϕH,K (ΓA (H)). By definition, LH,K is an A-principal overgroup of H and, by
construction, ΓA (LH,K ) is a subgraph of ΓA (K), which implies LH,K ≤ff K
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                              11


(see Section 2.2). It follows immediately that the A-fringe of H, OA (H),
satisfies the required conditions.                                     ⊔
                                                                       ⊓

    Thus, for a given H ≤fg F (A), the A-principal overgroups of H form one
possible collection of extensions that satisfy the requirements of Takahasi’s
theorem, let us say, a Takahasi family for H. This is certainly not the only
one: firstly, we may add arbitrary subgroups to a Takahasi family; secondly,
we observe that the statement of the theorem does not depend on the ambient
basis, so if B is another basis of F (A), then OB (H) forms a Takahasi family
for H as well. There does however exist a minimum Takahasi family for
H (see Proposition 3.7 below), which in particular does not depend on the
ambient basis. The main object of this paper is a discussion of this family,
which is introduced in the next section.


3     Algebraic extensions
The notion of algebraic extension discussed in this paper was first introduced
by Kapovich and Miasnikov [7]. It seems to be mostly of interest for finitely
generated subgroups, but many definitions and results hold in general and we
avoid restricting ourselves to finitely generated subgroups until that becomes
necessary.

3.1    Definitions
Let H ≤ K be an extension of free groups and let x ∈ K. We say that x
is K-algebraic over H if every free factor of K containing H, H ≤ L ≤ff K,
satisfies x ∈ L. Otherwise (i.e. if there exists H ≤ L ≤ff K such that x 6∈ L)
we say that x is K-transcendental over H.

Example 3.1 If H ≤ K, then every element x ∈ H is obviously K-algebraic
over H.
    Every element x ∈ K is K-algebraic over hxn i, for each integer n 6= 0. In
fact, it is straightforward to verify that if xn lies in a free factor L of K, then
so does x.
    If x is primitive in K (that is, if hxi ≤ff K), then every element of K \ hxi
is K-transcendental over the subgroup hxi.
    The notion of algebraicity over H is relative to K. For example, in F =
F (a, b), a2 is ha2 , b2 i-transcendental over H = ha2 b2 i since a2 b2 is primitive
in ha2 , b2 i. However, a2 is F -algebraic over H because no proper free factor
of F contains a2 b2 .                                                              ⊔
                                                                                   ⊓
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                       12


   The following is a trivial but useful observation.

Fact 3.2 Let H ≤ K be an extension of free groups, and let x, y ∈ K.

  (i) If x, y are K-algebraic over H then so are x−1 and xy.

 (ii) If x, y are K-transcendental over H then so is x−1 (but not in general
      xy).

    We say that an extension of free groups H ≤ K is algebraic, and we write
H ≤alg K, if every element of K is K-algebraic over H. It is called purely
transcendental if every element of K is either in H or is K-transcendental
over H. Naturally, there are extensions that are neither algebraic nor purely
transcendental. These concepts were originally introduced in [7], and the
following propositions further describe their properties.

Proposition 3.3 Let H ≤ K be an extension of free groups. The following
are equivalent:

 (a) H is contained in no proper free factor of K;

 (b) H ≤alg K, that is, every x ∈ K is K-algebraic over H;

 (c) there exists X ⊆ K such that K = hH ∪ Xi and every x ∈ X is
     K-algebraic over H (furthermore, if K is finitely generated, one may
     choose X to be finite).

Proof. (b) follows from (a) by definition. If (b) holds, then (c) holds with
X any system of generators for K. Finally, (a) follows from (c) in view of
Fact 3.2 (i).                                                              ⊔
                                                                           ⊓

Proposition 3.4 Let H ≤ K be an extension of free groups. The following
are equivalent:

 (a) H is a free factor of K,

 (b) H ≤ K is purely transcendental, that is, every x ∈ K \ H is K-
     transcendental over H.

Proof. (a) implies (b) by definition. To prove the converse, let M be the
intersection of all the free factors of K containing H. By Lemma 2.4, M is
a free factor of K containing H, and (b) implies that M = H.            ⊔
                                                                        ⊓
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                          13


Example 3.5 It is easily verified (say, using Example 3.1) that if 1 6= x ∈ F
and n 6= 0, we have hxn i ≤alg hxi.
   By Proposition 3.4, an extension of the form hxi ≤ F is purely transcen-
dental if and only if x is a primitive element of F . Moreover, if F has rank
two, then hxi ≤ F is algebraic if and only if x is not a power of a primitive
element of F .
   Assuming again that F has rank two, H ≤alg F for every non-cyclic
subgroup H. Indeed, every proper free factor of F is cyclic and hence cannot
contain H.                                                                  ⊔
                                                                            ⊓

   We denote by AE(H) the set of algebraic extensions of H, and we observe
that, in contrast with the definition of principal overgroups, this set does not
dependent on the choice of an ambient basis. This same observation can be
expressed as follows.

Fact 3.6 Let H ≤ K ≤ F be extensions of free groups and let ϕ ∈ Aut(F ).
Then H ≤alg K if and only if ϕ(H) ≤alg ϕ(K).

   We can now express the connection between algebraic extensions and
Takahasi’s theorem.

Proposition 3.7 Let H ≤fg F (A) be an extension of free groups. Then we
have:

  (i) AE(H) ⊆ OA (H);

 (ii) AE(H) is finite (i.e., H admits only a finite number of algebraic exten-
      sions);

(iii) AE(H) is the set of ≤ff -minimal elements of every Takahasi family for
      H (see Section 2.3);

 (iv) AE(H) is the minimum Takahasi family for H.

Proof. Let K be an algebraic extension of H. The proof of Takahasi’s
theorem shows that K is a free multiple of some principal overgroup L ∈
OA (H). Then, Proposition 3.3 implies that L = K proving (i). Statement
(ii) follows immediately.
     Let L be a Takahasi family for H and let K ∈ AE(H). By definition of L,
there exists a subgroup L ∈ L such that H ≤ L ≤ff K. By Proposition 3.3,
it follows that L = K, so K ∈ L. Thus AE(H) is contained in every Takahasi
family for H. For the same reason, K is ≤ff -minimal in L.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                             14


    Now suppose that K ∈ L is ≤ff -minimal in L, and let M be an extension
of H such that H ≤ M ≤ff K. By definition of a Takahasi family, there
exists L ∈ L such that H ≤ L ≤ff M, so L ≤ff K. Since K is ≤ff -minimal in
L, it follows that L = K, so M = K. Hence, H ≤alg K concluding the proof
of (iii).
    Finally, it is immediate that the ≤ff -minimal elements of a Takahasi family
for H again form a Takahasi family. Statement (iv) follows directly.          ⊔
                                                                              ⊓

Example 3.8 If H ≤fi K, then H ≤alg K. This follows immediately from
the observation that a proper free factor of K has infinite index.
    It follows that, if H ≤fi F (A), then AE(H) = OA (H) is equal to the
set of all extensions of H. Indeed, we have already observed at the end of
Section 2.2 that every extension of H is an A-principal overgroup of H, and
since H has finite index in each of its extensions, it is algebraic in each. ⊔
                                                                             ⊓

    Proposition 3.7 shows that AE(H) is contained in OA (H) for each ambient
basis A. We conjecture that AE(H) is in fact equal to the intersection of the
sets OA (H), when A runs over all the bases of F . Example 3.8 shows that
the conjecture holds if H has finite index. It also holds if H ≤ff F , since in
that case, AE(H) = {H}, and F admits a basis B relative to which ΓB (H)
is a graph with a single vertex.
    We conclude with a simple but important statement.

Proposition 3.9 Let F (A) be the free group on A and H ≤fg F (A). The
set AE(H) is computable.

Proof. Since every algebraic extension of H is in OA (H), it suffices to com-
pute OA (H) and then, for each pair of distinct elements K, L ∈ OA (H), to
decide whether L ≤ff K: AE(H) consists of the principal overgroups of H
that do not contain another principal overgroup as a free factor.
   In order to conclude, we observe that deciding whether L ≤ff K can be
done, for example, using the first part the classical Whitehead’s algorithm.
More precisely, Whitehead’s algorithm (see [8, Proposition 4.25]) shows how
to decide whether a tuple of elements, say u = (u1 , . . . , ur ), of a free group
K can be mapped to another tuple v = (v1 , . . . , vr ) by some automorphism
of K. The first part of this algorithm reduces the sum of the length of
the images of the ui to its minimal possible value. And it is easy to verify
that this minimal total length is exactly r if and only if {u1, . . . , ur } freely
generates a free factor of K. We point out here that an alternative algorithm
was recently proposed by Silva and Weil [15]. That algorithm is faster, and
completely based on graphical tools.                                             ⊔
                                                                                 ⊓
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                               15


   The efficiency of the algorithm to compute AE(H) sketched in the proof
of Proposition 3.9, is far from optimal. An upcoming paper by A. Roig,
E. Ventura and P. Weil discusses better computation techniques for that
purpose [13].

Remark 3.10 The terminology adopted for the concepts developed in this
section is motivated by an analogy with the theory of field extensions. More
precisely, if an element x ∈ K is K-transcendental over H, then H is a free
factor of hH, xi and hH, xi = H ∗ hxi (see Proposition 3.13 below). This is
similar to the field-theoretic definition of transcendental elements: an element
x is transcendental over H if and only if the field extension of H generated
by x is isomorphic to the field of rational fractions H(X).
    However, the analogy is not perfect and in particular, the converse does
not hold. For instance, a2 is ha, bi-algebraic over ha2 b2 i (see Example 3.1),
but ha2 b2 , a2 i = ha2 b2 i ∗ ha2 i. This stems from the fact, noticed earlier, that
the notion of an element x being K-algebraic over H, depends on K and not
just on x.
    It is natural to ask whether the analogy also extends to the definition of
algebraic elements: in other words, is there a natural analogue in this context
for the notion of roots of a polynomial with coefficients in H? The discussion
of equations in Section 4.4 offers some insight into this question.                ⊔
                                                                                   ⊓


3.2     Composition of extensions
We now consider compositions of extensions. Some of the results in the
following proposition come from [7]. We restate and extend them here with
simpler proofs. We also include in the statement well-known facts (the primed
statements), in order to emphasize the dual properties of algebraic and purely
transcendental extensions.

Proposition 3.11 Let H ≤ K be an extension of free groups, and let H ≤
Ki ≤ K be two sub-extensions, i = 1, 2.

  (i) If H ≤alg K1 ≤alg K then H ≤alg K.

 (i’) If H ≤ff K1 ≤ff K then H ≤ff K.

 (ii) If H ≤alg K then K1 ≤alg K, while H ≤ K1 need not be algebraic.

(ii’) If H ≤ff K then H ≤ff K1 , while K1 ≤ K need not be purely transcen-
      dental.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                                16


(iii) If H ≤alg K1 and H ≤alg K2 then H ≤alg hK1 ∪K2 i, while H ≤ K1 ∩K2
      need not be algebraic.

(iii’) If H ≤ff K1 and H ≤ff K2 then H ≤ff K1 ∩ K2 , while H ≤ hK1 ∪ K2 i
       need not be purely transcendental.

Proof. Statement (i’) and the positive parts of statements (ii’) and (iii’)
can be found in Lemma 2.4. The free group F on {a, b} already contains
counterexamples for the converse statements in (ii’) and (iii’): for the first
one, we have hai ≤ff F while hai ≤ff ha, b2 i ≤alg F (see Example 3.5). And
for the second one, we have h[a, b]i ≤ff ha, [a, b]i and h[a, b]i ≤ff hb, [a, b]i,
whereas h[a, b]i ≤alg ha, [a, b], bi = F .
    Now assume that H ≤alg K1 ≤alg K and let L be a free factor of K
containing H. Then, L∩K1 is a free factor of K1 containing H by Lemma 2.4.
Since H ≤ K1 is algebraic, we deduce that L ∩ K1 = K1 , and hence K1 ≤ L.
But K1 ≤alg K, so L = K. Thus, the extension H ≤ K is algebraic, which
proves (i).
    The first part of (ii) is clear. A counterexample for the second part in
F = F (a, b) is as follows: we have h[a, b]i ≤ff ha, [a, b]i ≤ F , while h[a, b]i ≤alg
F by Example 3.5.
    Suppose now that H ≤alg K1 and H ≤alg K2 , and let L be a free factor
of hK1 ∪ K2 i containing H. Then Lemma 2.4 shows that, for i = 1, 2,
L ∩ Ki ≤ff Ki containing H. Since H ≤alg Ki , we deduce that L ∩ Ki = Ki
and hence, Ki ≤ L. Thus, L = hK1 ∪ K2 i, and the extension H ≤ hK1 ∪ K2 i
is algebraic, thus proving the positive part of (iii).
    Finally, to conclude the proof of (iii), it suffices to exhibit subgroups
H, K1 , K2 such that H ≤alg Ki (i = 1, 2) but H ≤ff K1 ∩ K2 . Again in
F (a, b) take, for example, K1 = ha2 , bi and K2 = ha3 , bi, whose intersection
is K1 ∩K2 = ha6 , bi. Letting H = ha6 bi, we have H ≤ff K1 ∩K2 but H ≤alg K1
and H ≤alg K2 .                                                                     ⊔
                                                                                    ⊓

   To close this section, let us note another natural property of algebraic
extensions, which slightly generalizes a result of Kapovich and Miasnikov [7].

Proposition
 S             3.12 Let F be a free group. IfSHi ≤alg Ki ≤ F (i ∈ I), then
               S
h i Hi i ≤alg h i Ki i. The converse holds if h i Ki i = ∗i Ki .
                      S                S
Proof. Suppose thatSh i Hi i ≤ L ≤ff h i Ki i. Let j ∈ I. By Lemma 2.4,
we have L ∩ Kj ≤ff h i Ki i ∩ Kj = Kj . Moreover, Hj ≤ L ∩ Kj , so Kj =
L ∩ KS
     j since Hj ≤alg Kj , and hence KS
                                     j ⊆ L. This S holds for each j ∈ I, so
L = h i Ki i and we have shown that h i Hi i ≤alg h i Ki i.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                          17

                                     S                                 S
    For the converse, suppose that h i Ki i = ∗i Ki . It follows that h i Hi i =
∗i Hi . Now we assume that ∗i Hi ≤alg ∗i Ki . Let j ∈ I. If Hj ≤ L ≤ff Kj ,
then ∗i Hi ≤ L ∗ ∗i6=j Ki ≤ff ∗i Ki and hence L ∗ ∗i6=j Ki = ∗i Ki . Taking
the projection onto Kj , it follows that L = Kj . Thus Hj ≤alg Kj for each
j ∈ I.                                                                         ⊔
                                                                               ⊓

     Note that the converse of Proposition 3.12 does not hold in general, as can
be seen from the counterexample provided in the proof of Proposition 3.11
(iii′ ).

3.3    Elementary extensions
We say that an extension of free groups H ≤ K is elementary if K = hH, xi
for some x ∈ K. Elementary extensions turn out to be either algebraic or
purely transcendental, as we now see.

Proposition 3.13 Let H ≤ F be an extension of free groups and let x ∈ F .
Let also X be a new letter, not in F . The following are equivalent:

 (a) the morphism H ∗ hXi → F acting as the identity over H and sending
     X to x is injective;

 (b) H is a proper free factor of hH, xi;

 (c) H is contained in a proper free factor of hH, xi.

If, in addition, H is finitely generated, then these are further equivalent to:

 (d) rk(hH, xi) = rk(H) + 1;

 (e) rk(hH, xi) > rk(H).

Proof. It is immediately clear that statement (a) implies (b), and that (b)
implies (c).
    At this point, let us assume that H has finite rank. It is immediate that
rk(hH, xi) ≤ rk(H) + 1, so (b) implies (d) and (d) and (e) are equivalent.
Now consider the morphism from H ∗ hXi to hH, xi mapping H identically
to itself, and X to x. This morphism is surjective by construction, and if
rk(hH, xi) = rk(H ∗ hXi), then it is injective by the hopfian property of
finitely generated free groups. That is, (d) implies (a). Thus we have shown
that if H has finite rank, then statements (a), (b), (d) and (e) are equivalent.
It only remains to prove that (c) implies (a).
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                        18


    We now return to the general case, where H may have infinite rank, and
we assume that (c) holds, that is, hH, xi = K ∗L for some L 6= 1 and H ≤ K.
We have hH, xi ≤ hK, xi, and hence hK, xi = hH, xi = K ∗ L. Moreover,
x 6∈ K and we let x = k0 ℓ1 k1 · · · ℓr kr be the normal form of x in the free
product K ∗ L.
    Let M be a finitely generated free factor of K containing the ki , and let
N be such that K = M ∗ N. First we observe that

       hM, xi ≤ M ∗ L ≤ff K ∗ L = M ∗ N ∗ L = hK, xi = hM, N, xi.

It follows that N is a free complement of hM, xi in hK, xi, that is, hK, xi =
hM, xi ∗ N.
    Next we note that M ≤ff K ≤ff hK, xi, so M ≤ff hK, xi and hence
M ≤ff hM, xi. Since x 6∈ K, M is a finitely generated, proper free factor
of hM, xi, and we already know that this implies that the morphism from
M ∗hXi to F mapping M identically to itself and mapping X to x, is injective.
Since N is a free complement of the range of this morphism in hH, xi, and
also a free complement of M in K, it follows that the natural mapping from
K ∗ hXi to F mapping X to x is injective. Its restriction to H ∗ hXi is
therefore injective, and statement (a) holds, which completes the proof. ⊔  ⊓

   Proposition 3.13 immediately translates into the following.

Corollary 3.14 Let F be a free group and H ≤ K be an elementary exten-
sion of subgroups of F . Then, either H ≤alg K or H ≤ff K. Furthermore,
if H is finitely generated then rk(K) ≤ rk(H) + 1 with equality if and only if
H ≤ff K.

    Let us say that an extension H ≤ K is e-algebraic, written H ≤ealg K, if
it splits as a finite composition of algebraic, elementary extensions, H ≤alg
H1 ≤alg · · · ≤alg Hk = K. Then Proposition 3.13 yields the following.

Corollary 3.15 Let H be a finitely generated subgroup of a free group F and
let H ≤ealg K be an e-algebraic extension. Then rk(K) ≤ rk(H).

    Obviously, every extension H ≤ K with K finitely generated, splits into a
composition of elementary extensions, but an algebraic extension H ≤alg K
cannot always be split into a composition of algebraic elementary exten-
sions. In view of Corollary 3.15, this is the case for the algebraic extension
h[a, b]i ≤alg F (a, b). Thus, H ≤alg K does not imply H ≤ealg K.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                         19


3.4    Algebraic closure of a subgroup
If H ≤ K is an extension of free groups, there exists a greatest algebraic
extension of H inside K. This can be deduced from Proposition 3.12, but
the following theorem is a more precise statement.
Theorem 3.16 Let H ≤ L ≤ K be extensions of free groups. The following
are equivalent.
 (a) H ≤alg L ≤ff K.
 (b) L is the intersection of the free factors of K containing H.
 (c) L is the set of elements of K that are K-algebraic over H.
 (d) L is the greatest algebraic extension of H contained in K.
In this case, the subgroup L is uniquely determined by H and K.
Proof. Let x ∈ K. By definition, x is K-algebraic over H if and only if x
sits in every free factor of K containing H. This is exactly the equivalence of
statements (b) and (c). The equivalence of (c) and (d) is a direct consequence
of the fact that the elements that are K-algebraic over H form a subgroup
(Fact 3.2). Thus statements (b), (c) and (d) are equivalent.
    Now let L be defined as in (b): by (d), H ≤alg L. Now let x ∈ K \L. Since
x is not algebraic over H, there exists a free factor M ≤ff K containing H
and missing x. But L ≤ M, so x is not K-algebraic over L either. It follows
that the extension L ≤ K is purely transcendental, and hence L ≤ff K by
Proposition 3.4. This proves (b) implies (a).
    Finally, let us assume that H ≤alg L ≤ff K for some L. Let M be such
that H ≤ M ≤ff K. Then L ∩ M ≤ff L by Lemma 2.4 (ii). But we also have
H ≤ L ∩ M ≤ L and H ≤alg L. It follows that L ∩ M = L, that is L ≤ M,
and (b) follows. This concludes the proof.                                   ⊔
                                                                             ⊓

Remark 3.17 It is interesting to compare Theorem 3.16 with M. Hall’s The-
orem, stating that every finitely generated subgroup H ≤ F is a free factor of
a subgroup M of finite index in F . In other words, one can split the extension
H ≤ F in two parts, H ≤ff M ≤fi F , the first being purely transcendental,
and the second being finite index (and hence, algebraic). Note that the inter-
mediate subgroup M is not unique in general. Theorem 3.16 yields a “dual”
splitting of the extension H ≤ F , where the order between the transcen-
dental and the algebraic parts is switched around, and with the additional
nice property that the intermediate extension is now uniquely determined by
H ≤ F.                                                                        ⊔
                                                                              ⊓
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                        20


    Let H ≤ K be an extension of free groups. The subgroup L characterized
in Theorem 3.16 is called the K-algebraic closure of H, denoted clK (H). It
is natural to consider the extremal situations, where clK (H) = H (we say
that H is K-algebraically closed ) and where clK (H) = K (we say that H
is K-algebraically dense). Of course, these situations coincide with H ≤ K
being purely transcendental and algebraic, respectively.

Fact 3.18 Let H ≤ K be an extension of free groups. Then,

  (i) H is K-algebraically closed if and only if H ≤ff K,

 (ii) H is K-algebraically dense if and only if H ≤alg K.

     As established in the following proposition, maximal proper retracts of
a finitely generated free group K are good examples of extremal subgroups,
i.e. subgroups of K that are either K-algebraically closed or K-algebraically
dense. Recall that a subgroup H ≤ K is a retract of K if the identity
id : H → H extends to a homomorphism K → H, called a retraction (see [9]
for a general description of retracts of finitely generated free groups); in
particular, free factors of K are retracts of K. Note that if H is a retract
of K then rk(H) ≤ rk(K). Moreover, if K is finitely generated, the hopfian
property of finitely generated free groups shows that K is the unique retract
of K with rank equal to rk(K). So, if H is a proper retract of K then
rk(H) < rk(K).
     We also say that H is compressed in K (see [5]) if rk(H) ≤ rk(L) for each
H ≤ L ≤ K. By restricting a retraction to L, it is clear that every retract
of K (and, in particular, every free factor of K) is compressed in K.

Proposition 3.19 Let K be a finitely generated free group. A maximal
proper compressed subgroup (resp. a maximal proper retract) H of K is
either K-algebraically dense, or K-algebraically closed. In the latter case, H
is in fact a free factor of K, of rank rk(K) − 1.

Proof. The algebraic closure clK (H) is a free factor of K, and hence it
is also a retract and a compressed subgroup. By definition of H, either
clK (H) = K, and H is K-algebraically dense; or clK (H) = H and H is K-
algebraically closed and a free factor. Maximality then implies the announced
rank property.                                                              ⊔
                                                                            ⊓

   We now discuss the behavior of the algebraic closure operator.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                            21


Proposition 3.20 Let Hi ≤ K, i = 1, 2, be two extensions of free groups.
Then, clK (H1 ∩ H2 ) ≤ff clK (H1 ) ∩ clK (H2 ), and the equality is not true in
general.

Proof. By Theorem 3.16, clK (Hi ) is a free factor of K containing Hi , so
clK (H1 ) ∩ clK (H2 ) is a free factor of K containing H1 ∩ H2 (Lemma 2.4).
Again by Theorem 3.16, clK (H1 ∩ H2 ) is a free factor of clK (H1 ) ∩ clK (H2 ).
    A counterexample for the reverse inclusion is as follows: let K = F (a, b),
H1 = h[a, b]i and H2 = h[a, b−1 ]i. Both these subgroups are K-algebraically
dense (see Example 3.5) and their intersection is trivial.                     ⊔
                                                                               ⊓

Proposition 3.21 Let Ki ≤ K, i = 1, 2, be two extensions of free groups
and let H ≤ K1 ∩ K2 . Then, clK1 ∩K2 (H) ≤ff clK1 (H) ∩ clK2 (H), and the
equality is not true in general.

Proof. By Theorem 3.16, clKi (H) is a free factor of Ki containing H, so
clK1 (H) ∩ clK2 (H) is a free factor of K1 ∩ K2 containing H (Lemma 2.4).
Again by Theorem 3.16, clK1 ∩K2 (H) is a free factor of clK1 (H) ∩ clK2 (H).
    The following is a counter-example for the converse inclusion. Let K =
ha, b, ci be a free group of rank 3, let H = h[a, b], [a, c]i, K1 = ha, b, [a, c]i
and K2 = ha, c, [a, b]i. One can verify that K1 ∩ K2 = ha, [a, b], [a, c]i, so
clK1 ∩K2 (H) = H. On the other hand, H ≤alg Ki by Example 3.5 and Proposi-
tion 3.12, so clKi (H) = Ki and clK1 (H)∩clK2 (H) = K1 ∩K2 6= clK1 ∩K2 (H). ⊔   ⊓

Remark 3.22 If H ≤ K1 ≤ K2 , Proposition 3.21 shows that clK1 (H) ≤
clK2 (H). If in addition K1 ≤ff K2 , Proposition 3.16 shows that clK1 (H) =
clK2 (H). However, in general, even the inclusion clK1 (H) ≤ K1 ∩ clK2 (H)
may be strict, as the following counterexample shows.
    Let K2 = ha, bi be a free group of rank 2, and let H = h[a, b]i and
K1 = ha, [a, b]i. Then H ≤ff K1 ≤alg F and H ≤alg F . So, clK1 (H) = H is
properly contained in K1 ∩ clF (H) = K1 ∩ F = K1 .                        ⊔
                                                                          ⊓

    Finally, let us consider e-algebraic extensions. There too, there exists a
greatest e-algebraic extension, at least for finitely generated subgroups. We
first prove the following technical lemma.

Lemma 3.23 Let H ≤ K ≤ F be extensions of free groups and let x ∈ F .
If H ≤alg hH, xi, then K ≤alg hK, xi.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                            22


Proof. Assume H ≤alg hH, xi. If K ≤ hK, xi is not algebraic, then x 6∈ K
and K ≤ff hK, xi by Proposition 3.13. It follows that H ≤ hH, xi ∩ K ≤ff
hH, xi ∩ hK, xi = hH, xi, which forces either hH, xi ∩ K = H or hH, xi ∩ K =
hH, xi. The first possibility implies H = hH, xi ∩ K ≤ff hH, xi contradicting
the hypothesis, while the second possibility contradicts x 6∈ K.            ⊔
                                                                            ⊓

Corollary 3.24 Let H ≤ F be an extension of free groups and let H ≤ealg
Ki (i = 1,S . . . , n) be a finite family of e-algebraic extensions of H. Then
Ki ≤ealg h j Kj i for each i.
    In particular, if H is finitely generated, then H admits a greatest e-
algebraic extension in F .

Proof. It suffices to prove the first statement for n = 2. Let us assume
that H = H0 ≤alg H1 ≤alg · · · ≤alg Hp = K1 and that x1 , . . . , xp are such
that Hi = hHi−1 , xi i for each 1 ≤ i ≤ p. Then a repeated application of
Lemma 3.23 shows that K2 ≤ealg hK2 , x1 , . . . , xp i = hK1 ∪ K2 i.
    If H ≤fg F , H has finitely many algebraic extensions, and among them
finitely many e-algebraic extensions. The join of these extensions is again an
e-algebraic extension and this concludes the proof.                          ⊔
                                                                             ⊓

    The greatest e-algebraic extension of a subgroup H ≤ F , whose existence
is asserted in Corollary 3.24, is called its e-algebraic closure. We say that H is
e-algebraically closed if it is equal to its e-algebraic closure. Proposition 3.13
immediately implies the following characterization.

Corollary 3.25 Let H ≤ F be an extension of free groups. Then H is
e-algebraically closed if and only if hH, xi = H ∗ hxi for each x 6∈ H.

Example 3.26 Let x ∈ F be an element of a free group not being a proper
power. Then, for every y ∈ F , either hxi = hx, yi or rk(hx, yi) = 2. In other
words, maximal cyclic subgroups of free groups are e-algebraically closed.
    A subgroup H ≤ F is said to be strictly compressed if rk(H) < rk(K) for
each proper extension H < K ≤ F . It is immediate that strictly compressed
subgroups form a natural class of e-algebraically closed subgroups.
    By Example 3.5, we know that if F has rank two, then hxi ≤ F is algebraic
if and only if x is not a power of a primitive element of F . Hence, situations
like H = h[a, b]i < ha, bi are examples of algebraic extensions where the base
group H is e-algebraically closed. This is a behavior significantly different
from what happens in field theory.                                            ⊔
                                                                              ⊓
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                          23


Corollary 3.27 Let H ≤ F (A) be an extension of free groups. If H is
finitely generated, it is decidable whether H is e-algebraically closed.

Proof. Let x 6∈ H, viewed as a reduced word on the alphabet A, let p be
the longest prefix of x labeling a path starting at the designated vertex 1 in
ΓA (H), and let s be the longest suffix of x labeling a path to 1 in ΓA (H).
We denote by 1 · p and 1 · s−1 the end vertices of these two paths.
    First assume that the sum of the length of p and s is less than the length
of x, that is, if x = pys for some non-empty word y. Then ΓA (hH, xi) is
obtained from ΓA (H) by gluing a path (made of new vertices and new edges)
from 1 · p to 1 · s−1 , labeled y. In particular, rk(hH, xi) = rk(H) + 1.
    We now assume that the sum of the lengths of p and s is greater than or
equal to the length of x, and we let t be the longest suffix of p which is also
a prefix of s. That is, p = p′ t, s = ts′ and x = p′ ts′ . Let 1 · p′ be the end
vertex of the path starting at 1 and labeled p′ in ΓA (H). If 1 · p′ = 1 · s−1 ,
then x = p′ s labels in fact a loop at 1, that is, x ∈ H, a contradiction. So
the labeled graph ΓA (hH, xi) is the quotient of ΓA (H) by the congruence
generated by the pair (1 · p′ , 1 · s−1 ) (see the end of Section 2.2).
    Thus, in view of Corollary 3.25, H is e-algebraically closed if and only
if the following holds: for each pair of distinct vertices (v, w) in ΓA (H), the
subgroup represented by the quotient of ΓA (H) by the congruence generated
by (v, w) has rank at most rk(H). This is decidable, and concludes the
proof.                                                                         ⊔
                                                                               ⊓


4     Abstract properties of subgroups
Let F be a free group. An abstract property of subgroups of F is a set P of
subgroups of F containing at least the total group F itself. For simplicity, if
H ∈ P, we will say that the subgroup H satisfies property P.
    We say that the property P is (finite) intersection closed if the intersec-
tion of any (finite) family of subgroups of F satisfying P also satisfies P, and
that it is free factor closed if every free factor of a subgroup of F satisfying
P also satisfies P. Finally, we say that the property P is decidable if there
exists an algorithm to decide whether a given finitely generated subgroup
H ≤ F (A) satisfies P.

4.1    P-closure of a subgroup
Let F be a free group, P be an abstract property of subgroups of F , and
let H ≤ F . If there exists a unique minimal subgroup of F satisfying P
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                             24


and containing H, it is called the P-closure of H, denoted by clP (H); in this
situation, we say that H admits a well defined P-closure.

Proposition 4.1 Let F be a free group and let P be an abstract property of
subgroups of F .
  (i) If P is intersection closed, then every subgroup H ≤ F admits a well
      defined P-closure.
 (ii) If P is finite intersection closed and free factor closed then every finitely
      generated subgroup H ≤fg F admits a well defined P-closure.
(iii) If P-closures are well defined and P is free factor closed, then for every
      subgroup H ≤ F , we have H ≤alg clP (H). In particular, if H is finitely
      generated, then so is clP (H).

Proof. Statement (i) is immediate: it suffices to consider the intersection of
all the extensions of H satisfying P (there is at least one, namely F itself).
    If P is only finite intersection closed, but is also free factor closed, we use
Theorem 3.16: since every extension of a finitely generated subgroup H is a
free multiple of an algebraic extension of H, then every extension of H in P
contains an algebraic extension of H in P. It follows that the intersection of
all extensions of H in P is equal to the intersection of the algebraic extensions
of H in P. But the latter intersection is finite, and hence it satisfies P as
well, which concludes the proof of (ii).
    Finally, if P is free factor closed, then H is not contained in any proper
free factor of its P-closure, that is, H ≤alg clP (H).                           ⊔
                                                                                 ⊓

    It would be interesting to produce an example of an abstract property
P that is closed under free factors and finite intersections, not closed under
intersections, and non-trivial for finitely generated subgroups (note that the
property to be finitely generated satisfies the required closure and non-closure
properties, but it is trivial for finitely generated subgroups).

Remark 4.2 It is well known that the property of being normal in F is
closed under intersections and not under free factors, and that given a sub-
group H ≤ F , the normal closure of H is well-defined, and is not in general
finitely generated, even if H is.                                         ⊔
                                                                          ⊓

Proposition 4.3 Let P be an abstract property for subgroups of F (A) for
which P-closures are well defined. If P-closures of finitely generated sub-
groups of F (A) are computable, then P is decidable. The converse holds if,
additionally, P is free factor closed.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                           25


Proof. Let us assume that P-closures are computable. Then, in order to
decide whether a given H ≤fg F (A) satisfies P, it suffices to compute clP (H),
and to verify whether H = clP (H).
    Conversely, suppose that P is free factor closed and decidable. Then,
given H ≤fg F (A), one can compute the set AE(H), check which algebraic
extensions of H satisfy P and identify the minimal one(s). By Proposi-
tion 4.1, only one of them is minimal, and that one must be clP (H).         ⊔
                                                                             ⊓

Remark 4.4 Proposition 4.1 states that every property of subgroups that is
closed under (finite) intersections and under free factors yields a well-defined
closure operator for (finitely generated) subgroups of F , that can be obtained
by looking exclusively at algebraic extensions.
    A form of converse holds too: if K ≤fg F , let PK be the following property.
A subgroup L satisfies PK if and only if L is a free factor of an extension of K.
Clearly, F satisfies this property, and one can verify that PK is intersection
and free factor closed. Moreover, one can use Proposition 3.16 to verify that
the PK -closure of a subgroup H ≤ K is exactly the K-algebraic closure of
H. In particular, for every algebraic extension H ≤alg K, K is the P-closure
of H for some well-chosen property P.                                           ⊔
                                                                                ⊓


4.2    Some algebraic properties
Let us recall the definition of certain properties of subgroups, that have been
discussed in the literature. Let H ≤ F be an extension of free groups. We
say that H is
   • malnormal if H g ∩ H = 1 for all g ∈ F \ H;

   • pure if xn ∈ H, n 6= 0 implies x ∈ H (this property is also called being
     closed under radical, or being isolated);

   • p-pure (for a prime p) if xn ∈ H, (n, p) = 1 implies x ∈ H;
    The following results on malnormal and pure closure were first shown in
[7, Section 13]. The proof given here, while not fundamentally different, is
simpler and more general. Corollary 4.14 below gives further properties of
these closures.

Proposition 4.5 Let F (A) be a free group. The properties (of subgroups)
defined by malnormal, pure, p-pure (p a prime), retract and e-algebraically
closed subgroups are intersection and free factor closed, and decidable for
finitely generated subgroups.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                                26


    For each of these properties P, each subgroup H ≤ F (A) admits a well-
defined P-closure clP (H), which is an algebraic extension of H. Finally, if
H ≤fg F (A), the P-closure of H has finite rank and is computable.

Proof. The closure under intersections and free factors of malnormality is
immediate from the definition. The decidability of malnormality was estab-
lished in [1], with a simple algorithm given in [7, Corollary 9.11].
    The closure under intersections of the properties of purity and p-purity
is immediate. Now, assume that K is pure, H ≤ff K, and let x be such that
xn ∈ H with n 6= 0. Since K is pure, we have x ∈ K, and we simply need
to show that a free factor of a free group F is pure, which was established in
Example 3.1 above. Thus purity is free factor closed. The proof of the same
property for p-purity is identical. The decidability of purity and p-purity was
proved in [3, 4].
    It is shown in [2, Lemma 18] that an arbitrary intersection of retracts of
F is again a retract of F . Moreover, it follows from the definition of retracts
that a retract of a retract is a retract, and that a free factor is a retract. Thus
the property of being a retract of F is free factor closed. The decidability of
this property was established by Turner, but as no proof seems to have been
published, we give his in Proposition 4.6 below.
    Suppose that H ≤ff K ≤ F , K is e-algebraically closed and x 6∈ H. If
x 6∈ K, then hK, xi = K ∗ hxi, so hH, xi = H ∗ hxi. If x ∈ K \ H, then
we have that H is a free factor of hH, xi ≤ K and so, by Proposition 3.13,
we also conclude that hH, xi = H ∗ hxi. Thus the property of being e-
algebraically closed is closed under free factors.TNext, let (Hi )i∈I be a family
of e-algebraically closed subgroups, let H = i Hi , and let x 6∈ H. There
exists i ∈ I such that x 6∈ Hi , so hHi , xi = Hi ∗ hxi. Using Lemma 3.23, we
conclude that hH, xi = H ∗ hxi. Thus the property of being e-algebraically
closed is also closed under intersections. Finally, this property is decidable
by Corollary 3.27.
    The last part of the statement follows from Proposition 4.1.                  ⊔
                                                                                  ⊓

    As announced in the proof of Proposition 4.5, we prove the decidability
of retracts, that was established by Turner [19].

Proposition 4.6 Let H ≤ F (A) be an extension of finitely generated free
groups. It is decidable whether H is a retract of F (A).

Proof. (Turner) Suppose that A = {a1 , . . . , an } and let u1 , . . . , ur be a basis
of H. Then H is a retract of F (A) if and only if there exist x1 , . . . , xn ∈ H
such that the endomorphism ϕ of F (A) defined by ϕ(ai ) = xi maps H
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                                   27


identically to itself. That is, if ui (x1 , . . . , xn ) = ui for i = 1, . . . , r. This
can be expressed in terms of systems of equations.
    Let ei be the word on alphabet {X1 , . . . , Xn } obtained from the word ui
(on alphabet A) by substituting Xj for aj for each j. Then H is a retract
of F if and only if the system of equations ei (X1 , . . . , Xn ) = ui , i = 1, . . . , r
(where ui are viewed as constants in H) admits a solution in H. This is
decidable by Makanin’s algorithm [10] (note that the form of the system (i.e.
the words ei ) depends on the way H is embedded in F , but once this form is
established, the system itself is entirely set within H, so Makanin’s algorithm
works, applied to this system over H).                                                 ⊔
                                                                                       ⊓

    Let H ≤ F be an extension of free groups. Recall that H is compressed if
rk(H) ≤ rk(K) for every K ≤ F containing H (see Section 3.4), and say that
H is inert if rk(H ∩K) ≤ rk(K) for every K ≤ F . Both these properties were
introduced by Dicks and Ventura [5] in the context of the study of subgroups
of free groups that are fixed by sets of endomorphisms or automorphisms
(see also [21]).
    It is clear that an inert or compressed subgroup is finitely generated, with
rank at most rk(F ). It is also clear that inert subgroups (and retracts) of F
are compressed. On the other hand, we do not know whether all compressed
subgroups are inert, nor whether retracts are inert (both these facts are
conjectured in [21] and related to other conjectures about fixed subgroups in
free groups).
Proposition 4.7 Let F be a free group. The properties of inertness and
compressedness are closed under free factors. In addition, inertness is closed
under intersections.
    Each subgroup H ≤ F admits an inert closure, which is an algebraic
extension of H.
Proof. The closure of inertness under intersections is shown in [5, Corol-
lary I.4.13]. Free factors of F are trivially inert. Moreover, if H ≤ K ≤ F ,
H is inert in K and K is inert in F , then H is inert in F . So inertness is
also closed under free factors.
    Now suppose that H = L ∗ M ≤ F is compressed, and let L ≤ K ≤ F .
Since H ≤ hK, Mi, we have
           rk(L) + rk(M) = rk(H) ≤ rk(hK, Mi) ≤ rk(K) + rk(M).
It follows that rk(L) ≤ rk(K), and hence L is compressed. Thus, compressed-
ness is closed under free factors. The last statement is a direct application
of Proposition 4.1.                                                         ⊔
                                                                            ⊓
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                           28


    Note that, even though a finitely generated subgroup H admits an inert
closure, which is one of its (finitely many) algebraic extensions of H, we do
not know how to compute this closure, nor how to decide whether a subgroup
is inert.
    It is not known either whether compressedness is closed under intersec-
tions, or even finite intersections, so we don’t know whether each subgroup
admits a compressed closure. However it is decidable whether a finitely
generated subgroup of F is compressed [20]. Indeed if H ≤fg F , then H
is compressed if and only if rk(H) ≤ rk(K) for every algebraic extension
H ≤alg K ≤ F , which reduces the verification to a finite number of rank
comparisons.

4.3    On certain topological closures
Let T be a topology on a free group F . The abstract property of subgroups
consisting of the subgroups that are closed in T is trivially closed under
intersections. This property becomes more interesting when the topology
is related to the algebraic structure of F . This is the case of the pro-V
topologies that we analyze now.
     A pseudovariety of groups V is a class of finite groups that is closed under
taking subgroups, quotients and finite direct products. V is called non-trivial
if it contains some non-trivial finite group. Additionally, if for every short
exact sequence of finite groups, 1 → G1 → G2 → G3 → 1, with G1 and G3
in V, one always has G2 ∈ V, we say that V is extension-closed.
     For every non-trivial pseudovariety of groups V, the pro-V topology on a
free group F is the initial topology of the collection of morphisms from F into
groups in V, or equivalently, the topology for which the normal subgroups
N such that F/N ∈ V form a basis of neighborhoods of the unit. We refer
the readers to [11, 22] for a survey of results concerning these topologies with
regard to finitely generated subgroups of free groups. In particular, Ribes
and Zalesskiı̆ showed that if V is extension-closed then every free factor of a
closed subgroup is closed [12]. The following observation then follows from
Proposition 4.1.

Fact 4.8 Let V be a non-trivial extension-closed pseudovariety of groups.
Then the pro-V closure of a finitely generated subgroup H is finitely gener-
ated, and an algebraic extension of H.

    In the case of the pro-p topology (p is a prime and the pseudovariety V is
that of finite p-groups, which is closed under extensions), Ribes and Zalesskiı̆
[12] showed that one can compute the closure of a given finitely generated
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                           29


subgroup of F (A). A polynomial time algorithm was later given by Margo-
lis, Sapir and Weil [11], based on the finiteness of the number of principal
overgroups of H, that is, essentially on the spirit of Fact 4.8. Moreover, they
showed that one can simultaneously compute the pro-p closures of H, for
all primes p, using the fact that they are all algebraic extensions, and hence
that they take only finitely many values. This was also used to show the
computability of the pro-nilpotent closure of a finitely generated subgroup:
even though the pseudovariety of finite nilpotent groups is not closed under
extensions, it still holds that the pro-nilpotent closure of a finitely generated
subgroup is finitely generated and computable.
     At this point, several remarks are in order. First, Ribes and Zalesskiı̆
[12] proved that if V is extension-closed and if H̄ is the pro-V closure of
H, then rk(H̄) ≤ rk(H). The proof of this fact can be reduced to dimen-
sion considerations in appropriate vector spaces. This proof does not seem
related with the idea of e-algebraic extensions, which also lowers the rank
(Corollary 3.15).
     Next, not every algebraic extension arises as a pro-V closure for some
V. This is clear if H ≤alg K and rk(K) > rk(H) by the result of Ribes and
Zalesskiı̆ cited above, but rank is not the only obstacle. Consider indeed
H = ha, bab−1 i ≤ F (a, b). Then H ≤alg F (Example 3.5) and AE(H) =
OA (H) = {H, F }. We now verify that H is V-closed for each non-trivial
extension-closed pseudovariety V, so F is never the V-closure of H. Since
V is non-trivial, the cyclic p-element group Cp = hc | cp i sits in V for some
prime p. Let ϕp : F → Cp be the morphism defined by ϕp (a) = 1 and
ϕp (b) = c, and let Np = ker ϕp . Then H ≤ Np and Np is V-closed, so H is
not topologically dense in F . Since the V-closure of H is in AE(H), it follows
that H is closed in the pro-V topology.
     Solvable groups form an extension-closed pseudovariety, so the above re-
sults apply to it: in particular, given an extension H ≤fg F (A), we can
compute a finite list of candidates for being the pro-solvable closure of H,
namely AE(H) (or even this list, restricted to the extensions of rank at most
rk(H)). However, it is a wide open problem to compute this closure.
     Finally, let us consider the (uncountable) collection of extension-closed
pseudovarieties of finite groups V as above. For each finitely generated sub-
group H ≤ F , the pro-V closures of H are among the (finitely many) alge-
braic extensions of H, so each finitely generated subgroup H naturally in-
duces a finite index equivalence relation on the collection of the V’s. It would
be interesting to investigate the properties of these equivalence relations. In
particular, the intersection of these equivalence relations, as H runs over all
the (countably many) finitely generated subgroups of F (a, b), has countably
many classes, so there are pseudovarieties V that are indistinguishable in
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                                      30


this way.

4.4     Equations over a subgroup
In this section we use equations over free groups to define abstract properties
of subgroups. Let H ≤ F be an extension of free groups. A (one variable)
H-equation (or equation over H) is an element e = e(X) of the free group
H ∗hXi, where X is a new free letter, called the variable. An element x ∈ F is
a solution of e(X) if e(x) = 1 in F (technically: if the morphism H ∗hXi → F
mapping H identically to itself and X to x, maps e to 1).
Example 4.9 If H = ha2 i, the H-equation e(X) = Xa2 X −1 a−2 admits a as
a solution. So does the H-equation X 2 a−2 .
    If e does not involve X, that is, e ∈ H, then e has no solution unless it is
the trivial equation e = 1, in which case every element of F is a solution. ⊔ ⊓

    We immediately observe the following.
Lemma 4.10 Let H ≤ F be an extension of free groups and let x ∈ F .
The element x is a solution of some non-trivial H-equation if and only if the
elementary extension H ≤ hH, xi is algebraic.
Proof. Let X be a new free generator and let ϕ : H ∗ hXi → F be the
morphism that maps H identically to itself and X to x. By definition, x
is a solution of some non-trivial equation over H if and only if ϕ is not
injective, and we conclude by Proposition 3.13 and Corollary 3.14 that this
is equivalent to H ≤alg hH, xi.                                          ⊔
                                                                         ⊓

     In order to make this natural definition of equations independent on the
choice of the subgroup H, we consider a countable set X, Y1 , Y2 , . . . of vari-
ables and we call equation any element e of the free group on these variables.
If H ≤ F is an extension of free groups, a particularization of e over H is the
H-equation e(X, h1 , h2 , . . .) obtained by substituting elements h1 , h2 , . . . ∈ H
for the variables Y1 , Y2, . . . (and having X as variable).
     A solution of the equation e over H is a solution of some non-trivial
particularization of e over H, that is, an element x ∈ F such that, for some
h1 , h2 . . . ∈ H, e(X, h1 , h2 , . . .) 6= 1 but e(x, h1 , h2 , . . .) = 1. (Note that even
when X occurs in e, some particularizations of e over H can be trivial).
     Let E be an arbitrary set of equations. We say that a subgroup H ≤ F
is E-closed if H contains every solution over H of every equation in E. Note
that, when looking for solutions, the set E is not considered as a system of
equations, but as a set of mutually unrelated equations. In particular, a
larger set E yields a larger set of solutions.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                             31


Proposition 4.11 Let F be a free group and let E be a set of equations.
Then the property of being E-closed is closed under intersections and under
free factors.

Proof. The closure under intersections follows directly from the definition.
Now assume that K ≤ F is E-closed and let H ≤ff K. Let x be a solution of
an equation of E over H. Then x is also a solution over K, and hence x ∈ K.
Now, by Lemma 4.10, H ≤alg hH, xi ≤ K. This contradicts H ≤ff K unless
H = hH, xi, and hence x ∈ H.                                              ⊔
                                                                          ⊓

Corollary 4.12 Let H ≤ F and let E be a set of equations. There exists a
least E-closed extension of H, denoted by clE (H) and called the E-closure of
H. Moreover, H ≤alg clE (H).
    If in addition H is finitely generated, then H ≤ealg clE (H), rk(clE (H)) ≤
rk(H) and there exists a finite subset E0 of E such that clE0 (H) = clE (H).

Proof. Propositions 4.1 and 4.11 directly prove the first part of the state-
ment.
    We now suppose that H ≤fg F and we let H0 = H and suppose that
we have constructed distinct extensions H0 ≤ealg H1 ≤ealg · · · ≤ealg Hn (n ≥
0), elements x1 , . . . , xn ∈ F , and equations e1 , . . . , en ∈ E such that Hi =
hHi−1 , xi i and xi is a solution of ei over Hi−1 . If Hn is not E-closed, then
there exists an equation en+1 ∈ E, and an element xn+1 6∈ Hn such that xn+1
is a solution of a non-trivial particularization of en+1 over Hn . Then Hn+1 =
hHn , xn+1 i is a proper elementary algebraic extension of Hn by Lemma 4.10.
Since H has only a finite number of algebraic extensions, this construction
must stop, that is, for some n, Hn is E-closed. It follows easily that Hn is
the E-closure of H, whose existence was already established. In particular
H ≤ealg clE (H), and rk(clE (H)) ≤ rk(H) by Corollary 3.15.
    Finally, let E0 = {e1 , . . . , en }. Any E-closed subgroup is also E0 -closed,
and the E0 -closure of H must contain H1 , . . . , Hn . Thus clE (H) = clE0 (H). ⊔⊓

   We conclude with the observation that some of the properties discussed in
Section 4.2 can be expressed in terms of equations. Let p be a prime number
and let

                      Emal = {X −1 Y1 XY2 },
                        Ep = {X n Y1 | (n, p) = 1},
                                                 [
                       EZ = {X n Y1 | n 6= 0} =     Ep ,
                                                      p
                      Ecom = {X −1 Y1−1 XY1 }.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                             32


Proposition 4.13 Let H ≤ F be an extension of free groups. The subgroup
H is
    (i) malnormal if and only if it is Emal -closed;
 (ii) p-pure if and only if it is Ep -closed;
(iii) pure if and only if it is EZ -closed, and if and only if it is Ecom -closed.

Proof. H is Emal -closed if and only if, for all h1 , h2 ∈ H, not simultaneously
trivial, every solution of the equation X −1 h1 Xh2 = 1 belongs to H. That
is, if and only if x−1 Hx ∩ H 6= 1 implies x ∈ H. This is precisely the
malnormality property for H. This proves (i).
    H is Ep -closed if and only if H contains the n-th roots of every one of its
elements, for all n such that (n, p) = 1. Again, this is exactly the definition
of p-purity, showing (ii).
    Similarly, H is EZ -closed if and only if H is pure. Finally, we recall that
two elements x and y in F commute if and only if they are powers of a
common z ∈ F . Thus the subgroup generated by H and all the roots of its
elements is exactly the Ecom -closure of H.                                    ⊔
                                                                               ⊓

     Corollary 4.12 immediately implies the following.

Corollary 4.14 Let H ≤fg F and let K be the malnormal (resp. pure, p-
pure) closure of H. Then H ≤ealg K and rk(K) ≤ rk(H).


5      Some open questions
To conclude this paper, we would like to draw the readers’ attention to a few
of the questions it raises.
 (1) We believe that the algebraic extensions of a finitely generated sub-
     group H ≤fg F are precisely the extensions which occur as principal
     overgroups of H for every
                             T choice of an ambient basis. That is, we con-
     jecture that AE(H) = A OA (H), where A runs over all the bases of
     F . As noticed in section 3.1, this is the case when H ≤fi F or H ≤ff F ,
     but nothing is known in general.
 (2) With reference to Corollary 3.15, we would like to find an algebraic
     extension H ≤alg K of finitely generated groups, where rk(K) ≤ rk(H),
     yet the extension is not e-algebraic. It would be appropriate to look
     for such an extension where H is e-algebraically closed in K, that is,
     hH, xi = H ∗ hxi for each x ∈ K \ H (Corollary 3.25).
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                          33


 (3) Even though a finitely generated subgroup H admits an inert closure,
     which is one of the finitely many (computable) algebraic extensions
     of H, we do not know how to compute this closure. Equivalently, it
     would be interesting to find an algorithm to decide whether a subgroup
     is inert (see section 4.2).

 (4) It is not known whether an intersection, even a finite intersection, of
     (strictly) compressed subgroups is again (strictly) compressed. In other
     words, does a finitely generated subgroup admit a (strictly) compressed
     closure? If the answer was affirmative, then these closures would be
     computable, as indicated in section 4.2.

 (5) As pointed out in section 4.3, we know that if V is a non-trivial
     extension-closed pseudovariety of groups and H ≤fg F , then H̄, the
     pro-V closure of H, is an algebraic extension of H with rank at most
     rk(H). However the known proof of this fact does not rely on the notion
     of e-algebraic extensions. We would like to find an example of such a
     subgroup H and a pseudovariety V such that the extension H ≤ H̄
     is not e-algebraic – or alternately to give a new proof of Ribes and
     Zalesskiı̆’s result (that in this situation, rk(H̄) ≤ rk(H)), by showing
     that H ≤ealg H̄.

 (6) As indicated at the end of section 4.3, it would be interesting to find
     and investigate explicit examples of pseudovarieties V1 and V2 , such
     that the pro-V1 and pro-V2 closures of H do coincide, for every H ≤fg
     F . As argued above, there are uncountably many such pairs being
     indistinguishable by means of closures of finitely generated subgroups.

 (7) Finally, Corollary 4.12 shows that for every set of equations E and every
     H ≤fg F , there exists a finite subset E0 ⊆ E such that clE0 (H) = clE (H).
     Is it true that such a finite set always exists satisfying the previous
     equality for all finitely generated subgroups of F at the same time
     (showing a kind of noetherian behavior)?


Acknowledgements
E. Ventura thanks the support received from DGI (Spanish government)
through grant BFM2003-06613, and from the Generalitat de Catalunya through
grant ACI-013. P. Weil acknowledges support from the European Science
Foundation program AutomathA. E. Ventura and P. Weil wish to thank
the Mathematics Department of the University of Nebraska (Lincoln), where
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                              34


they were invited Professors when part of this work was developped. All
three authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Centre de Recerca
Matemàtica (Barcelona) for their warm hospitality during different periods
of the academic year 2004-2005, while part of this paper was written.


References
 [1] G. Baumslag, A. Miasnikov and V. Remeslennikov, Malnormality is decidable
     in free groups, Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 9 (1999), no. 6, 687–692.

 [2] G.M. Bergman, Supports of derivarions, free factorizations and ranks of fixed
     subgroups in free groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 351 (1999), 1531-1550.

 [3] J.-C. Birget, S. Margolis, J. Meakin, P. Weil. PSPACE-completeness of certain
     algorithmic problems on the subgroups of free groups, in ICALP 94 (S. Abite-
     boul, E. Shamir éd.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science 820 (Springer, 1994)
     274–285.

 [4] J.-C. Birget, S. Margolis, J. Meakin, P. Weil. PSPACE-completeness of certain
     algorithmic problems on the subgroups of free groups, Theoretical Computer
     Science 242 (2000) 247–281.

 [5] W. Dicks, E. Ventura, The group fixed by a family of injective endomorphism
     of a free group, Contemp. Math., 195 (1996), 1-81.

 [6] S. Gersten, On Whitehead’s algorithm, Bull. Am. Math. Soc., 10 (1984),
     281-284.

 [7] I. Kapovich and A. Miasnikov, Stallings Foldings and Subgroups of Free
     Groups, J. Algebra, 248, 2 (2002), 608-668.

 [8] R. Lyndon and P. Schupp, Combinatorial group theory, Springer, (1977,
     reprinted 2001).

 [9] W. Magnus, A. Karras and D. Solitar, Combinatorial group theory, Dover
     Publications, New York, (1976).

[10] G.S. Makanin. Equations in a free group, Izvestiya Akad. Nauk SSSR 46
     (1982), 1199-1273 (in Russian). (English translation: Math. USSR Izvestiya
     21 (1983), 483-546.)

[11] S. Margolis, M. Sapir and P. Weil, Closed subgroups in pro-V topologies and
     the extension problems for inverse automata, Internat. J. Algebra Comput.
     11, 4 (2001), 405-445.

[12] L. Ribes and P. A. Zalesskiı̆, The pro-p topology of a free group and algorith-
     mic problems in semigroups, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 4 (1994) 359-374.
Algebraic extensions in free groups                                             35


[13] A. Roig, E. Ventura, P. Weil, A software to compute the algebraic extensions
     of a finitely generated subgroup of a free group, in preparation.

[14] J.-P. Serre, Arbres, amalgames, SL2 , Astérisque 46, Soc. Math. France,
     (1977). English translation: Trees, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
     Springer, (2003).

[15] P. Silva and P. Weil, On an algorithm to decide whether a free group is a free
     factor of another, preprint.

[16] J. R. Stallings, Topology of finite graphs, Inventiones Math. 71 (1983), 551–
     565.

[17] M. Takahasi, Note on chain conditions in free groups, Osaka Math. Journal
     3, 2 (1951), 221-225.

[18] E.C. Turner, Test words for automorphisms of free groups, Bull. London Math.
     Soc., 28 (1996), 255-263.

[19] E.C. Turner, private communication, 2005.

[20] E. Ventura, On fixed subgroups of maximal rank, Comm. Algebra, 25 (1997),
     3361-3375.

[21] E. Ventura, Fixed subgroups in free groups: a survey, Contemp. Math., 296
     (2002), 231-255.

[22] P. Weil. Computing closures of finitely generated subgroups of the free group,
     in Algorithmic problems in groups and semigroups (J.-C. Birget, S. Margolis,
     J. Meakin, M. Sapir éds.), Birkhaüser, 2000, 289–307.
