                                                COUNTING CURVES IN HYPERBOLIC SURFACES

                                                                VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO
arXiv:1508.02265v1 [math.GT] 10 Aug 2015




                                                  Abstract. Let Σ be a hyperbolic surface. We study the set of curves
                                                  on Σ of a given type, i.e. in the mapping class group orbit of some fixed
                                                  but otherwise arbitrary γ0 . For example, in the particular case that Σ
                                                  is a once-punctured torus, we prove that the cardinality of the set of
                                                  curves of type γ0 and of at most length L is asymptotic to L2 times a
                                                  constant.




                                                                                    1.
                                              Throughout this paper we let Σ be a complete hyperbolic surface of finite
                                           area, with genus g and r punctures, and distinct from a thrice punctured
                                           sphere. By an immersed multicurve, or simply multicurve, in Σ we will
                                           mean an immersed compact 1-dimensional submanifold of Σ each of whose
                                           components represents (the conjugacy class of) a primitive non-peripheral
                                           element in π1 (Σ). Two multicurves γ, γ 0 are of the same type if they belong
                                           to the same mapping class orbit, meaning that there is a diffeomorphism
                                           φ of Σ such that γ and φ(γ 0 ) are isotopic as immersed submanifolds. In
                                           general, isotopic geodesics are considered to be equivalent. For instance,
                                           every multicurve γ is isotopic to a geodesic multicurve and the length `Σ (γ)
                                           is the length of the latter.
                                              In this paper we study the set Sγ0 = Map(Σ) · γ0 of (isotopy classes of)
                                           multicurves of some given type γ0 . More precisely, we are interested in the
                                           behavior, when L tends to infinity, of the number |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |`Σ (γ) ≤ L}|
                                           of multicurves in Σ of type γ0 and of at most length L. Since this number
                                           grows coarsely like a polynomial of degree 6g − 6 + 2r (see [18] for the case
                                           that γ0 is simple and [20, 21] or Corollary 3.6 below for the general case),
                                           the perhaps most grappling question is whether the limit
                                                                          |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |`Σ (γ) ≤ L}|
                                           (1.1)                      lim
                                                                     L→∞        L6g−6+2r
                                           exists. Our main result is that it does if Σ is a once-punctured torus:
                                           Theorem 1.1. Let Σ be a complete hyperbolic surface of finite volume home-
                                           omorphic to a once punctured torus and let γ0 ⊂ Σ be a multicurve. The
                                           limit (1.1) exists and moreover we have
                                                   |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |`Σ (γ) ≤ L}|
                                                lim                        = Cγ0 · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|`Σ (λ) ≤ 1})
                                               L→∞            L2
                                             August 11, 2015.
                                                                                     1
2                  VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

where µThu is the Thurston measure on the space of measured laminations
ML(Σ) and Cγ0 > 0 depends only on γ0 .
   In the case of simple multicurves Theorem 1.1 is due to McShane-Rivin
[12]. Also, for simple multicurves, Mirzakhani [13] proved that the limit
(1.1) exists for all g and r. Building on the work of Mirzakhani, Rivin
[19] established the existence of the limit (1.1) for multicurves with a single
self-intersection.
Remark. Recently, and independently of our work, Mirzakhani [14] has es-
tablished the existence of (1.1) in complete generality. Her argument and
ours are different in nature and in some sense complementary. See the re-
marks following the statement of Corollary 4.4 in this introduction for more
on the relation between Mirzakhani’s result and ours.
   Still in the setting of simple multicurves, the case of the torus is much
more treatable than the general one because any two simple multicurves
in the torus are of the same type as long as they have the same number
of components. This means that, in the case of the torus, counting simple
multicurves of some fixed type basically reduces to counting all simple mul-
ticurves, a much simpler problem. In fact, if Σ is an arbitrary hyperbolic
surface of finite area with genus g and r punctures, if S is the set of all
multicurves in Σ, and if we set
                    cΣ = µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|`Σ (λ) ≤ 1})
then
      |{γ ∈ S|`Σ (γ) ≤ L, ι(γ, γ) = 0}|
    lim                                    = cΣ
 L→∞              L6g−6+2r
      |{γ ∈ S|`Σ (γ) ≤ L, ι(γ, γ) = 1}|
  lim                                      = 3(2g − 2 + r) · cΣ
 L→∞              L6g−6+2r
      |{γ ∈ S|`Σ (γ) ≤ L, ι(γ, γ) = 2}|      9                          
  lim               6g−6+2r
                                           = (2g + r)(2g + r − 3) + 2 · cΣ .
 L→∞              L                          2
See Proposition 3.1 in [13] for the first limit and Corollary 4.7 for the other
two.
   As was the case in [13], the basic strategy of this paper is to translate
the problem of the existence of the limit (1.1) to the existence of a limit of
a suitable family of measures. More concretely, we will consider, for γ0 and
Sγ0 as above and for each L, the measure
                                   1       X
                         νγL0 = 6g−6+2r        δ1γ
                               L                 L
                                          γ∈Sγ0

on the space C(Σ) of geodesic currents on Σ. Here, δ 1 γ is the Dirac measure
                                                      L
centred in the current L1 γ. We will study these measures when L → ∞
and prove, for instance, that they can only accumulate to multiples of the
Thurston measure µThu on the space ML(Σ) of measure laminations:
                                                                                3

Proposition 4.1. Any sequence (Ln )n of positive numbers with Ln → ∞
                                                   Ln
has a subsequence (Lni )i such that the measures (νγ0 i )i converge in the
weak-*-topology to the measure α · µThu on ML(Σ) ⊂ C(Σ) for some α > 0.
   The point of considering limits of these measures is that actual existence
of the limit of the measures νγL0 implies (is equivalent to) the existence of
the limit (1.1). Before making this statement precise, recall that there is
a (filling) current associated to the hyperbolic metric, the Liouville current
λΣ ∈ C(Σ), satisfying
(1.2)                          ι(λΣ , γ) = `Σ (γ)
for every curve γ. Here ι(·, ·) is the intersection form on the space of currents
and a current λ is filling if every geodesic in Σ is transversally intersected
by some geodesic in the support of λ.
   In light of (1.2), we can consider the limit (1.1) as a special case of the
limit
                                |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ0 , γ) ≤ L}|
(1.3)                     lim
                         L→∞             L6g−6+2r
where λ0 ∈ C(Σ) is filling. We prove:
Proposition 4.3. Let (Ln )n be a sequence with limn→∞ νγL0n = α · µThu for
some α ∈ R+ . Then
         |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ0 , γ) ≤ Ln }|
    lim                               = α · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1})
   n→∞           Ln 6g−6+2r
for every filling current λ0 ∈ C(Σ).
  As a direct consequence we will get that the existence or non-existence of
the limit (1.3) does not depend on the concrete (filling) current λ0 . In fact,
we get something better:
Corollary 4.4. Let Σ be a hyperbolic surface of finite area, and let λ1 , λ2 ∈
C(Σ) be filling currents. Then we have
          |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ1 , γ) ≤ L}|   µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ1 , λ) ≤ 1})
        lim                          =
     L→∞ |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ2 , γ) ≤ L}|    µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ2 , λ) ≤ 1})
for every multicurve γ0 in Σ. Here µThu is as always the Thurston measure
on the space of measured laminations ML(Σ).
Remark. In view of Corollary 4.4, it follows from Mirzakhani’s result [14]
on the existence of limit (1.1) that the limit (1.3) also exists for any pos-
sible filling current for any arbitrary hyperbolic surface of finite type. For
instance, it follows that the analogue of the limit (1.1) also exists if we mea-
sure lengths with respect to an arbitrary metric of negative curvature [15],
or with respect to a singular flat structure [6]. All this might be worth not-
ing because Mirzakhani’s arguments, using trace relations, may be hard to
apply directly in these situations. This is what we meant when we claimed
that the results in this paper and in [14] are to some extent complementary.
4                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

Remark. As we will explain in a short digression at the end of section 4.4,
it follows from Corollary 4.4 and the work of Mirzakhani [14] that more
general limits of the form (1.3) exist, where one replaces the multicurve γ0
by a current α.
    As we have seen, to establish the existence or non-existence of either
limit (1.1) and (1.3) what we have to figure out is whether the measures
νγL0 converge. Our strategy is to relate these measures to some other mea-
sures which are supported from the very beginning on the space of measured
laminations. To do so we need to establish a relationship between the mul-
ticurves in Sγ0 , which are in general non-simple, and simple multicurves. In
some sense, establishing this relation is the main goal of the paper.
    In the case that Σ has no punctures this relation is pretty straight forward.
Namely, we will prove that “generic” multicurves in Sγ0 have intersections
with extremely small angles:
Theorem 1.2. Let Σ be a closed hyperbolic surface of genus g ≥ 2 and
let ](γ) ∈ (0, π2 ] denote the largest angle among the self-intersections of a
multicurve γ ⊂ Σ. Then
                                                           
                     1       γ ⊂ Σ multicurve, ι(γ, γ) = k,
            lim                                                =0
           L→∞ L6g−6              ](γ) ≥ δ, `Σ (γ) ≤ L
for every k and every δ > 0.
   Hence, if Σ is closed it follows from Theorem 1.2 that generically ele-
ments of Sγ0 have, if their length is large, extremely flat self-intersections.
This means thus that there is a well-determined way to resolve the self-
intersections of such generic γ to produce a simple multicurve which locally
is almost parallel to the original curve. Doing so we obtain a map
                            π,γ0 : Sγ0 → MLZ (Σ)
from a generic subset Sγ0 of Sγ0 to the set MLZ (Σ) of simple multicurves
in Σ. Here, genericity of Sγ0 just means that
                          |{γ ∈ Sγ0 \ Sγ0 |`Σ (γ) ≤ L}|
                     lim                                    = 0.
                    L→∞            L6g−6+2r
The map π,γ0 maps multicurves in Sγ0 to simple multicurves of basically
the same length. By itself, this property already implies that π,γ0 is finite-
to-one. What is more remarkable is that the cardinality of the preimages
  −1 (γ)| is uniformly bounded from above (see section 3.4 for precise state-
|π,γ 0
ments).
   The basic idea of the proof of Proposition 4.1 is to push the measures
 L
νγ0 via the map π,γ0 to the space of measured laminations and compare
them to the so obtained measures µL    ,γ0 . The latter measures can be more
concretely written as
                                 1       X
                                                   −1
                    µL
                     ,γ0 =                      |π,γ  (γ)|δ 1 γ
                             L6g−6+2r                 0       L
                                       γ∈MLZ
                                                                                 5

where δx is again the Dirac measure centred at x. We will show that the
measures µL            L
            ,γ0 and νγ0 get closer and closer to each other as L increases (see
Lemma 4.2). In particular, to establish the convergence of νγL0 it suffices to
prove that µL ,γ0 converges.
   The key observation is that, since |π,γ   −1 (γ)| is uniformly bounded, any
                                                0
accumulation point µ of (µL   ,γ0 ) is absolutely continuous with respect to the
Thurston measure µThu on ML(Σ). Since µ is also a limit of the mapping
class group invariant measures νγL0 , it is itself also mapping class group in-
variant. Thus we get from a theorem due to Masur [10] asserting that µThu
is ergodic, that the limit µ is actually a multiple of the Thurston measure,
as we claimed in Proposition 4.1.
   Note at this point that if the map π,γ0 were equivariant under the map-
ping class group, then the existence of the limit limL→∞ µL    ,γ0 would directly
follow from the work of Mirzakhani [13] on the distribution of simple multi-
curves. However, the map π,γ0 is unfortunately not equivariant because its
domain Sγ0 is not mapping class group invariant.
   To partially by-pass this problem we will observe that if τ is an almost
geodesic maximal train-track in Σ then
                              −1               −1
(1.4)                       |π,γ0
                                   (φ(γ))| ≥ |π,γ0
                                                    (γ)|
for all γ carried by and filling τ and for every mapping class φ in the semi-
group
                        Γτ = {φ ∈ Map(Σ)|φ(τ ) ≺ τ }
consisting of those mapping classes which map τ to a train-track carried by
τ . This is relevant because from (1.4) and Proposition 4.1 we get:
Proposition 4.6. Let τ be a maximal recurrent train-track and U ⊂ {λ ∈
ML(Σ)|λ ≺ τ } open with µThu (U ) > 0 and µThu (∂U ) = 0. Suppose also
that the following holds:
        (*) If I ⊂ {γ ∈ MLZ (Σ)|γ ≺ τ } is a non-empty Γτ -invariant
        set of simple multicurves carried by τ then there is α > 0 with
                            1
                    lim 6g−6+2r |I ∩ L · U | = α · µThu (U ).
                   L→∞ L

Then the limit limL→∞ νγL0 exists.
   The virtue of Proposition 4.6 is that it reduces the problem of showing
that the measures νγL0 converge to a problem about distribution of simple
multicurves. On the other hand, working with semigroups is harder than
working with groups.
   However, in the case of a punctured torus we can identify the semigroup
Γτ with the positive semigroup SL2 N of the mapping class group Map(Σ) ≃
SL2 Z, the set of multicurves carried by τ with N2 , the space of measured
laminations with R2 /±1, and the Thurston measure with Lebesgue measure.
In other words we are in a very concrete situation and we can use results of
Maucourant [11] to prove:
6                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

Theorem 1.3. Every SL2 N-invariant set I ⊂ N2 has a density, meaning
that there is α ∈ R with
                           1
                       lim   |I ∩ L · U | = α · vol(U )
                      L→∞ L2

for any U ⊂ R2 open and bounded by a rectifiable Jordan curve. Here
L · U = {v ∈ R2 | L1 v ∈ U } is the set obtained by scaling U by L and vol(U )
is the area of U with respect to Lebesgue measure.
   Theorem 1.1 will follow from Theorem 1.3, Proposition 4.6 and Proposi-
tion 4.3.
    Before concluding the introduction, note that Theorem 1.2 was only stated
for closed surfaces. Indeed, the statement is wrong in general. In the pres-
ence of cusps there are small and large angles due to the fact that the
intersections might well occur in the vicinity of the cusps. This means that
the construction of the map π,γ0 is going to be more subtle in the pres-
ence of cusps than in the closed case. In fact, section 2 and section 3 are
basically devoted to constructing the map π,γ0 and to study some of its
properties. More concretely, in section 2 we introduce a generalization of
the notion of train-track, to which we give the beautiful Finnish name of
radalla. A radalla is basically an immersed version of a train-track, and the
main result of this section is Proposition 2.1 which asserts that for every k
and every radalla τ̂ there is a uniform upper bound for the cardinality of the
set of multicurves carried by τ̂ , with k self-intersections and which represent
a given solution of the switch equations. In section 3 we study the Hausdorff
limits of sequences of multicurves with self-intersections and prove that for
every k there are finitely many almost geodesic radallas which carry all but
finitely many multicurves with at most k self-intersection. We use this fact
to prove that the number |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |`X (γ) ≤ L}| grows polynomially of
degree L6g−6+2r (Corollary 3.6) and to prove Theorem 1.2. Finally, in sec-
tion 3 we also construct the map π,γ0 . In section 4 we study the measures
νγL0 and µL,γ0 and prove Proposition 4.1, Proposition 4.3, Corollary 4.4 and
Proposition 4.6. In section 5 we discuss the case when Σ is a once-punctured
torus, prove Theorem 1.3 and conclude the proof of Theorem 1.1.
Remark. Before concluding we would like to point out that all the results in
this paper hold true if we replace the mapping class group Map(Σ) by one
of its finite index subgroups Γ, that is, if we consider the set Γ · γ0 instead
of the set Sγ0 = Map(Σ) · γ0 . The point is that we rely on Masur’s theorem
on the ergodicty of the Thurston measure and this result also holds true for
finite index subgroups of the mapping class group.

Acknowledgements. Many thanks are due to Maryam Mirzakhani for
interesting comments and for sharing a draft of her paper [14]. We also
thank François Maucourant for basically proving Proposition 5.2 for us.
We also thank Benjamin Bandli for interesting conversations. We are also
                                                                                        7

grateful to the organizers of the Sixth Iberoamerican Congress on Geometry,
especially to Ara Basmajian, because it was during this event that we began
this work. In fact, we were motivated by a beautiful talk by Moira Chas.

                                           2.
   Train-tracks are a key tool to study the structure of the set of all simple
curves on surfaces. In this section we introduce a small variation, basically
an immersed version of a train-track, which we will use to study curves with
self-intersections. We refer to [17, 16, 9] for basic facts about train-tracks.
2.1. Train-tracks and radallas. By a smoothly embedded 1-complex τ in
a surface Σ we mean a finite embedded complex whose edges are smoothly
embedded arcs with well-defined tangent lines at the end-points. We more-
over require that for every vertex v all the lines tangent to edges adjacent
to it agree – we denote this line by Tv τ .
   If τ is such an embedded 1-complex and v ∈ τ is a vertex, then the set of
(germs of) edges adjacent to v can be divided into two sets, according to the
two directions of Tv τ . We say that τ is a pre-train-track if these two sets are
non-empty for each vertex – equivalently, every vertex v of τ is contained
in the interior of a smoothly embedded arc I ⊂ τ . A complementary region
∆ of a pre-train-track τ is the metric completion of a connected component
of Σ \ τ . Note that the boundary of ∆ is smooth except at a finite number
of cusp points corresponding to vertices of τ . If v happens to be a trivalent
vertex, then v corresponds to a single cusp in a single complementary region.
A pre-train-track τ is a train-track if no complementary region is a disk with
at most 2 cusps or a disk with one puncture and no cusp.
Remark. We will only consider trivalent train-tracks, meaning that all ver-
tices have degree 3.
  By definition, train-tracks are embedded in Σ – we now define an im-
mersed version:
Definition. A radalla1 in a surface Σ is a triple (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) where
   (1) τ̂ is a finite graph and τ ⊂ τ̂ is a subgraph containing all vertices.
   (2) φ : τ̂ # Σ is a smooth immersion whose restriction to τ is an
       embedding and φ(τ ) is a train-track in Σ.
   (3) If e is an edge of τ̂ \ τ , then
           • φ(e) is contained in a complementary region ∆ of the train-track
             φ(τ ).
           • The end points of e are mapped into cusps of ∆.
           • φ|e cannot be homotoped relative to the endpoints to a map with
             image in φ(τ ).
   1According to Google Translate, radalla means track in Finnish. According to our
Finnish connection it is mostly used in the form olla radalla as in to be on track to pick
up girls in bars but we ignored it when we coined this term.
8                      VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

            • φ|e cannot be homotoped to φ|e0 relative to the endpoints for any
              edge e0 of τ̂ \ τ distinct from e.
   We will often denote the radalla (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) just by τ̂ and we will
identify the subgraph τ with the train-track φ(τ ). In fact, one should think
of a radalla τ̂ as a diagonal extension of the underlying train-track τ where
the added diagonals are possibly neither simple nor disjoint – compare with
figure 1.




         Figure 1. Part of the image of a radalla τ̂ – the solid lines
         are part of the underlying train-track τ and the black dot is
         a cusp.

    Recall that an immersed curve γ : S1 → Σ is isotopic to a second curve
γ 0 : S1 → Σ if there is a smooth map
                           S1 × [0, 1] → Σ, (t, s) 7→ γs (t)
such that γ0 = γ, γ1 = γ 0 and γs is an immersion for all s. Note that by
definition any curve isotopic to an immersed curve is immersed as well.
Definition. Let τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) be a radalla. An immersed but possibly
non-simple curve γ : S1 → Σ is carried by τ̂ if there is a map γ 0 : S1 → τ̂
such that γ and φ ◦ γ 0 are isotopic.
   Curves carried by a radalla behave very much like curves carried by a
train-track. For instance, if Σ is endowed with a hyperbolic metric then
there is a constant L = L(τ̂ , Σ) such that for every curve γ : R → τ̂ for
which φ ◦ γ : R → Σ has constant velocity, any lift φ]         ◦ γ : R → Σ̃ = H2
                                                             1
is an L-bilipschitz embedding. In particular, if γ : S → τ̂ is such that
φ ◦ γ is a smooth immersion, then γ is an essential curve in Σ. Moreover,
if γ, γ 0 : S1 → τ̂ where φ ◦ γ and φ ◦ γ 0 are homotopic smooth immersions,
then there is h : S1 → S1 with γ 0 = γ ◦ h.
   Recall that a train-track τ is carried by another train-track τ 0 – that is
τ ≺ τ 0 – if the embedding of τ into Σ is smoothly isotopic to an immersion
τ → Σ with image contained in τ 0 . This definition carries over to radallas as
follows: we say that τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) is carried by τ̂ 0 = (τ̂ 0 , τ 0 , φ0 : τ̂ 0 #
Σ) – and write τ̂ ≺ τ̂ 0 – if there is a smooth immersion ψ : τ̂ → τ̂ 0 mapping
                                                                                   9

τ into τ 0 and such that φ0 ◦ ψ is homotopic to φ. Clearly, being carried is
a transitive property, meaning for instance that if multicurve γ ≺ τ̂ and if
τ̂ ≺ τ̂ 0 then γ ≺ τ̂ 0 .
     While train-tracks and radallas are topological objects, we will be mostly
interested in those that are geometrically well-behaved. A radalla τ̂ =
(τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) is -geodesic if the image φ(e) of each edge e of τ̂ has
at most geodesic curvature  and length at least 1 . Note that it follows
from this definition that, as long as  is small enough, every curve carried
                                                   1
by an -geodesic radalla has at least length 2      . Also note that, since all the
vertices of τ̂ are also vertices of τ , if the train-track φ(τ ) is -geodesic, then
the radalla is isotopic to an -geodesic radalla.

2.2. Thickenings of radallas. Train-tracks can be consider as graphs or
as band complexes, and the same is true for radallas. We recall briefly the
definition of a band complex. For us, a band is just a rectangle [0, a] × [0, b]
with long horizontal sides and short vertical sides (a >>> b), foliated by
the vertical segments {t} × [0, b]. A band complex is a space X obtained by
gluing finitely many bands together along the short vertical sides in such
a way that in the end the whole boundary of X consists of the horizontal
components of the bands. Note that the vertical foliations of the bands
match up to a foliation FX of the band complex X.
Definition. A thickening of a radalla (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) is a triple (X, ι, φ̄)
where
      • X is a surface endowed with a structure of a band complex,
      • ι : τ̂ → X is an embedding transversal to the vertical foliation FX
        such that each band contains a leaf of FX which meets ι(τ̂ ) exactly
        once, and
      • φ̄ : X → Σ is an immersion with φ = φ̄ ◦ ι.
  We note that each radalla has a thickening and that thickenings are unique
up to homeomorphism of X and isotopy of φ̄. Note also that a curve γ :
S1 → Σ is carried by a radalla (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) if and only if whenever
(X, ι, φ̄) is a thickening there is an immersion γ̄ : S1 → X transversal to the
vertical foliation FX and with φ̄ ◦ γ̄ isotopic to γ. The curve γ̄ : S1 → X is
unique up to isotopy.
   Recall that by a multicurve λ in Σ we mean a closed immersed 1-manifold,
each one of whose components represents a primitive non-peripheral element
in π1 (Σ), and that ι(λ, λ) is the minimum number of self-intersections of
those λ0 in general position and isotopic to λ. The condition that each com-
ponent of a multicurve represents a non-trivial primitive element in π1 (Σ)
amounts to asserting that each multicurve is determined by the associated
geodesic current. Moreover, the self-intersection number agrees with the
self-intersection number when we see multicurves as currents.
10                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

   Suppose that the multicurve λ in Σ is carried by a radalla τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ :
τ̂ # Σ), meaning that each component is carried by τ̂ . Let X = (X, ι, φ̄) be
a thickening of τ̂ and λ̄ ⊂ X a multicurve transversal to the vertical foliation
FX such that φ̄(λ̄) is isotopic to λ. Since λ̄ is unique up to isotopy we get
that the self-intersection number
                                          def
(2.1)                           ιX (λ, λ) = ι(λ̄, λ̄)
of λ̄ with itself depends only on λ and X. We note that
                                ι(λ, λ) ≥ ιX (λ, λ)
but that in general equality does not hold: for instance the self-intersections
arriving from the edges of τ̂ which are not embedded under φ are not counted
when computing ιX (λ, λ).

2.3. Switch equations. Let (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) be a radalla and denote by
E(τ̂ ) and V (τ̂ ) the sets of edges and vertices of τ̂ . At each vertex v choose
an orientation of Tv τ̂ and denote by Ev+ (τ̂ ) (resp. Ev− (τ̂ )) all the (germs
of) edges starting at v in positive (resp. negative) direction. These choices
yield a linear map
                                                                     
                                                  X           X
    Wτ̂ : RE(τ̂ ) → RV (τ̂ ) , (ae )e∈E(τ̂ ) 7→      ae −         ae 
                                                e∈Ev+ (τ̂ )    e∈Ev− (τ̂ )   v∈V (τ̂ )

                                                      E(τ̂ )
We refer to the entries of the elements in R+            as weights. Elements in
                                                                               E(τ̂ )
ker(Wτ̂ ) are said to satisfy the switch equations. More concretely, w ∈ R+
satisfies the switch equations if at every vertex the sum of positive weights
equal the sum of negative weights.
   Every curve γ : S1 → τ̂ with φ ◦ γ an immersion yields a solution ωγ to
the weight equation by associating to each edge e ∈ E(τ̂ ) the cardinality of
γ −1 (x) for some interior point x ∈ e. Note that ωγ = ωγ 0 if φ ◦ γ and φ ◦ γ 0
are homotopic. The vector ωγ associated to a multicurve is the sum of the
vectors associated to the individual components.
   Basically, the difference between a train track and a radalla is that the
later is not embedded, meaning that there are edges which cross themselves
or which cross another edge. This implies that often curves carried by a
radalla are going to have self-intersections. In fact, if e and e0 are (possibly
equal) edges of a radalla τ̂ with ι(e, e0 ) = r and if γ : S1 → τ̂ is an immersion
with associated vector of weights ωγ then γ has at least r · ωγ (e) · ωγ (e0 ) self-
intersections. Here ι(e, e0 ) is the minimal number of interior intersection
points of edges isotopic to e and e0 in the complement of the underlying
train-track and relative to the respective endpoints.
Remark. In fact, it is possible to establish a more precise version of this last
fact. Namely, if (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) is a radalla with thickening (X, ι, φ̄), then
                                                                                              11

we have
                                             X
          ι(λ, λ0 ) = ιX (λ, λ0 ) +                          ι(e, e0 ) · ωλ (e) · ωλ0 (e0 )
                                      {e,e0 }⊂E(τ̂ )\E(τ )

for any two, possibly equal, multicurves λ, λ0 carried by τ̂ . Here ιX (λ, λ0 ) is
defined as in (2.1).
2.4. The meat. It is well-known that a simple multicurve γ carried by a
train-track is determined by the associated vector of weights ωγ . It is on the
other hand easy to find examples showing that this is no longer true if the
multicurves under consideration are not simple. We will see however that
as long as one only allows a bounded number of self-intersections, then γ is
determined by ωγ up to bounded indeterminacy. In fact, Proposition 2.1 is
the most important result of this section:
Proposition 2.1. For every radalla (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) and every k there is K
                                                     E(τ̂ )
such that for every integral positive solution ω ∈ Z+ ⊂ RE(τ̂ ) of the switch
equation there are at most K homotopy classes of multicurves γ carried by
τ̂ with ωγ = ω and with ι(γ, γ) = k.
   The proof of Proposition 2.1 is pretty long – we suggest that the reader
skips over it in a first reading.
Proof. The basic strategy of the proof is to show that each multicurve γ
carried by τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ), with ι(γ, γ) = k and with ωγ = ω, can
be isotoped into “normal form”, and that the number of curves in the said
normal form is bounded in terms of the radalla τ̂ and the bound k on the
number of self-intersections.
   To begin with we choose a thickening X = (X, ι, φ̄) of τ̂ . We will draw
a pattern, of which we think of as millimeter paper, on a subset X̄ of X.
Before describing the construction in words, we refer the reader to figure
2 and suggest to keep this drawing in mind while reading the following
lines. Well, starting with the construction denote by B(e) the band of X
corresponding to the edge e of τ̂ . Draw ωe disjoint segments on B(e) that are
transversal to the vertical foliation of B(e), joins the two vertical boundary
components, and such that when we consider the union of all these segments
over all bands we obtain a simple multicurve Ω in X with ωΩ = ω. Now,
we choose for each edge e of τ̂ a finite set L(e) consisting of at least 200k
vertical leaves contained in the band B(e) and we set L = ∪L(e) – abusing
notation we will use L (resp. L(e)) to refer both to the finite set of leaves
and to the union of those leaves as a subset of X. The multicurve Ω and the
set L determine a tiling by closed squares of a subset X̄ of X, namely the
closure of the union of those squares in X whose boundary consists of two
subsegments of L and two subsegments of Ω. The boundary ∂ X̄ consists of
finitely many vertical and finitely many horizontal subsegments – we refer
to the vertical subsegments as the exceptional vertical segments. Note that
the exceptional segments appear only at the vertices of τ̂ – more concretely,
12                  VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

if a vertex is such that s edges of τ̂ merge into an edge, then we find there
s − 1 exceptional vertical segments.




        Figure 2. The milllimeter paper pattern on X: the dotted
        lines are the boundary of X, the solid vertical segments are
        the leaves in L, the solid horizontal segments are the trace
        of the multicurve Ω, the shaded region is X̄, and finally the
        thick and short vertical segment is the exceptional segment
        corresponding to the vertex in the picture.

   We will refer to the closed squares in X̄ as tiles. For lack of a better
word, if Q is a tile we will refer to the two horizontal sides and to the two
diagonals of Q as being non-vertical. A multicurve γ : S1 t · · · t S1 → X is
in preliminary normal form (cf. figure 3) if
      • the set of self-intersections is discrete,
      • the image is the union of non-vertical segments, and
      • γ is C 0 -close to a smooth multicurve in X which is transversal to
        the vertical foliation FX .
Observe that every curve in preliminary normal form is carried by τ̂ and
that by construction we have ωγ (e) ≤ ω(e) for every edge e and every such
multicurve γ. Note also that since we are only going to be interested in
homotopy classes of multicurves, we will identify multicurves in preliminary
normal form with the same image.
Claim 1. Every multicurve γ in X transversal to the vertical foliation FX ,
with ωγ = ω, and with ιX (γ, γ) ≤ k is isotopic (transversally to FX ) to a
multicurve γ 0 in preliminary normal form and with ιX (γ 0 , γ 0 ) = ιX (γ, γ).
Proof of Claim 1. We can perturb γ so that, while keeping all its listed
properties, we also have that γ is contained in the tiled part X̄ of X, no
crossing of γ lies on L, and there is at most a single crossing between any two
consecutive leaves of L. Here we say that two leaves `, `0 of L are consecutive
if there is a square whose vertical boundary is contained in ` ∪ `0 .
   Note that all of this means that each ` ∈ L(e) meets γ in ωγ (e) = ω(e)
points. We can thus isotope γ so that, while keeping all its properties so
far, it meets (for every e) each leave ` ∈ L(e) in the points ` ∩ Ω, i.e. in the
                                                                               13




        Figure 3. A curve γ in preliminary normal form with weight
        vector ωγ = ω.

vertices of the tiling of X̄. Now, the image of γ consists of segments I which
join points in L ∩ Ω and whose interiors are disjoint from L. Moreover, the
two endpoints of any such segment I are contained in some tile. Replacing
each segment I by the corresponding straight segment in the tile we obtain
a curve in preliminary normal form, as we wanted to construct.              
   Having brought multicurves in preliminary normal form is not enough
to prove Proposition 2.1 because the number of multicurves in such form
depends not only on the radalla and on the number k of allowed crossings,
but also on the entries of the vector ω. To avoid this dependence, we are
going to associate a complexity κ(γ) to every multicurve γ in preliminary
normal form and with ιX (γ, γ) ≤ k. Note that each such curve γ determines
a collection Cγ of ιX (γ, γ) closed tiles, namely the tiles containing a crossing
– let |Cγ | be the support of Cγ , i.e. the union of the closed tiles therein.
   We set the complexity of γ to be
κ(γ) =the number of tiles in Cγ contained in those connected components
        of |Cγ | which do NOT contain an exceptional vertical segment.
We will say that a multicurve γ is in normal form if it is in preliminary
normal form and has vanishing complexity κ(γ) = 0. We are going to prove:

Claim 2. Every multicurve γ in X transversal to the vertical foliation FX ,
with ωγ = ω, and with ιX (γ, γ) ≤ k is isotopic (transversally to FX ) to a
multicurve γ 0 in normal form, and with ιX (γ 0 , γ 0 ) = ιX (γ, γ).
   Assuming Claim 2 for a moment, we conclude the proof of Proposition
2.1. Any multicurve λ carried by τ̂ lifts to a multicurve λ̄ ⊂ X, meaning
that φ̄(λ̄) isotopic to λ. We know moreover that
                            ιX (λ̄, λ̄) ≤ ι(λ, λ) = k
Now, from Claim 2 we get that λ̄ is isotopic to a multicurve γ ⊂ X in normal
form and with ιX (γ, γ) ≤ k. The claim of Proposition 2.1 will follow once we
prove that the number of choices for γ is bounded just in terms of k and the
14                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

radalla τ̂ . To see that this is the case endow the quadrangulated part X̄ with
a metric which makes each tile isometric to the euclidean square of diameter
1. Now, if γ is a curve in preliminary normal form, with ιX (γ, γ) ≤ k we
have that each connected component of |Cγ | has at most diameter k. If γ is
in normal form then each component of |Cγ | contains an exceptional vertical
segment, meaning that all the crossings of γ are located in one of the tiles
within distance k of one of these exceptional vertical segments. Since the
number of exceptional vertical segments just depends on the radalla τ̂ we
obtain that all the crossings of γ are in a set of tiles whose cardinality just
depends on τ̂ and k, as we needed to show.
   It remains to prove Claim 2.
Proof of Claim 2. By Claim 1 we know that γ is isotopic to a multicurve
γ (0) ⊂ X in preliminary normal form and with ιX (γ (0) , γ (0) ) = ιX (γ, γ).
Among all choices for γ (0) , consider those with minimal complexity κ(γ (0) ),
and among those with minimal complexity, suppose that the number of
connected components of |Cγ (0) | is also minimal. We will show that κ(γ (0) ) =
0, meaning that γ (0) is in normal form. Seeking a contradiction suppose that
there is a component |Cγ∗(0) | of |Cγ (0) | which does not contain an exceptional
vertical segment. Choose one of the tiles T forming |Cγ∗(0) | and orient it
transversally to the vertical foliation but otherwise arbitrarily – for the sake
of concreteness we will refer to the positively oriented side as “left”. Note
that this orientation of T induces an orientation of each other tile in the
connected component |Cγ∗(0) |. We can now isotope the curve γ (0) to a curve
γ (1) by shifting the crossings in |Cγ∗(0) | to the left. More precisely γ (1) is the
curve in preliminary normal form with the same number of crossings as γ (0) ,
such that each crossing of γ (0) which does not lie in |Cγ∗(0) | is still a crossing
of γ (1) , and finally such that each crossing of γ (0) contained in |Cγ∗(0) | has
been replaced by a crossing on the tile to the left – compare with figure 4.




        Figure 4. The process by which γ (1) is obtained from γ (0) .

   The sets of tiles Cγ (1) and Cγ (0) containing the crossings of γ (1) and γ (0) are
identical, besides the fact that the set of tiles Cγ∗(0) has been shifted to the left
- denote the new set by Cγ∗(1) . If the set |Cγ∗(1) | does not touch neither another
component of |Cγ (1) |, nor contains a exceptional vertical segment, then we
can repeat this process and obtain curves γ (2) and so on. For instance, in
                                                                                 15

the example presented in figure 4 one can repeat this process 4 times but
no more – compare with figure 5.




        Figure 5. The shaded tiles can be moved 4 times to the left
        but no more because the cloud corresponding to γ (4) contains
        an exceptional vertical segment.

   Note that the minimality assumptions on our curve γ (0) imply that the
process in question can be repeated infinitely often. This implies that there
is some s such that Cγ∗(s) = Cγ∗(0) because there are only finitely many tiles
and hence only finitely many configurations of tiles. But then, this implies
that X̄ contains a closed annulus
                                 A = ∪si=0 |Cγ∗(i) |
made out of tiles and such that the only (closed) tiles in |Cγ (0) | which in-
tersect A are those in Cγ∗(0) . This implies that every component of γ (0)
which meets A is contained therein. Since we are assuming that γ (0) realizes
ιX (γ (0) , γ (0) ) = ιX (γ, γ) and since there are crossings in A, it follows that
some component of γ (0) ∩ A represents a multiple of the soul of A, contra-
dicting the assumption that γ (0) is isotopic to the multicurve γ, and hence
that each of its components is primitive in π1 . This proves Claim 2.            
  Having proved Claim 2, we have also proved Proposition 2.1.                    
   Continuing with the same notation as in the proof of Proposition 2.1,
note that the number s(τ̂ , ω, k) of isotopy classes of multicurves γ carried
by the radalla τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ), with ωγ = ω and with ι(γ, γ) = k
can be algorithmically computed. In fact, when k is small the quantity
s(τ̂ , ω, k) does not depend on ω as long as ω(e) is bounded from below by
some threshold to ensure that all possibilities can be realized.
   Suppose for the sake of concreteness that the radalla τ̂ is actually a triva-
lent train-track (meaning that all vertices have degree 3 and that τ̂ = τ ) and
              E(τ̂ )
that ω ∈ N+ is such that the weight of each edge is relatively large, say
ω(e) ≥ 10 for all e ∈ E(τ̂ ). Then, since simple multicurves in train-tracks
are determined by the associated weights we have
                                  s(τ̂ , ω, 0) = 1
Things are more complicated if we allow for intersections, and in fact we
have
                                           V
                            s(τ̂ , ω, 1) =
                                           2
16                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

where V is the number of vertices of the train-track τ = τ̂ . Indeed, if
a multicurve γ carried by τ̂ is in normal form and satisfies ωγ = ω and
ι(γ, γ) = 1, then the unique crossing of γ has to be in one of the V tiles
adjacent to an exceptional segment. Conversely, for each one of these tiles
we get one such curve, meaning that there are exactly V curves γ ≺ τ̂ in
normal form, with ι(γ, γ) = 1 and ωγ = ω. On the other hand, s(τ̂ , ω, 1) = V2
because each multicurve γ in normal form with ωγ = ω and ι(γ, γ) = 1 is
isotopic to precisely another one such multicurve γ 0 obtained as follows: let
T0 be the tile containing the crossing of γ0 = γ, let T1 be the tile adjacent
to T0 and opposite to the exceptional segment contained in T0 , and let γ1 be
the multicurve in preliminary normal form, with ωγ1 = ω and with a single
crossing in T1 . Then let T2 be the tile adjacent to T1 and opposite to T0
and let γ2 be the multicurve in preliminary normal form with ωγ2 = ω and
with a single crossing in T2 . Define inductively T3 , T4 , . . . pushing the tile
away from the exceptional segment and let γ3 , γ4 , . . . be the corresponding
curves. This process has to end with γ 0 = γk when Tk is adjacent to a second
exceptional segment. Note that γ 0 is in normal form, that γ 0 6= γ, and that
γ and γ 0 are isotopic.
   A similar computation can be done if one counts multicurves with 2 self-
intersections – one obtains that
                                               V (V + 6)
                                s(τ̂ , ω, 2) =
                                                   8
Leaving the details of the computation of s(τ̂ , ω, 2) to the reader, we just
sketch a possible approach. We think of the two crossings as railroad cars,
assign to each one of them a weight and a direction and let them run around
subject to the condition that if they touch each other then they get stuck
together and travel in the direction of the heavier one. The argument in the
proof of Claim 2 shows that at some point they both have to get stranded
at an exceptional segment (cf. with figure 5). In this way we associate, after
choosing weights and directions, to each multicurve in preliminary normal
form a multicurve in normal form satisfying additional condition on the
directions and weight of the cars. There are V (V + 6) such say ”labeled
normal forms” and 8 possible distributions of labels, which implies that
s(τ̂ , ω, 2) = V (V8+6) , as we claimed.
Remark. The threshold ω(e) ≥ 10 for every edge is very generous – in fact,
for the two treated cases k = 1, 2, it would have sufficed to require that
ω(e) ≥ k + 2 for every edge e.

                                       3.
     With the same notation as all along let
(3.1)             Sk = {γ multicurve in Σ with ι(γ, γ) = k}
be the set of all multicurves in Σ with k self-intersections. In this section
we will show that there is a finite collection of radallas that carry all but
                                                                                 17

finitely many elements in Sk . In the absence of cusps most element in Sk are
in fact carried by maximal train-tracks – in the presence of cusps they are
carried by radallas whose associated train-track is maximal and has finitely
many extra edges around the punctures. Below we will see that these facts
together with Proposition 2.1 prove the polynomial growth of the number
of elements in Sk of length `Σ ≤ L. We will also describe how one can
associate a simple multicurve to each generic (in a precise sense) multicurve
with self-intersections.
3.1. Finding radallas. The basic idea used to prove that there is a finite
collection of radallas that carry all but finitely many elements in Sk is to
consider the possible Hausdorff limits of sequences of such multicurves and
find radallas that carry their limits.
   We start by extending some basic facts about simple multicurves to the
setting of multicurves with self-intersections. It is well-known that the set
of simple closed geodesics on Σ are contained in a compact subset of Σ. A
direct generalization of this argument also shows the following lemma that
we state here for further reference:
Lemma 3.1. For every k there exists a compact set K ⊂ Σ such that every
geodesic multicurve γ ⊂ Σ with at most k self-intersections is contained in
K.                                                                       
  Note that Lemma 3.1 implies that any sequence (γn ) of multicurves in Σ
with ι(γ, γ) = k has a Hausdorff convergent subsequence.
   Recall that a lamination is a compact subset of Σ which is foliated by
simple geodesics, and recall that the Hausdorff limits of sequences of sim-
ple multicurves are laminations (see [5] for basic facts and definitions about
laminations). Similarly, the Hausdorff limit λ of a sequence (γn ) of mul-
ticurves with self-intersections is a union of geodesics but, naturally, they
can intersect. However, if the multicurves γn have a bounded number of
intersections, then the non-simple leaves in λ are finite and isolated in the
following sense:
Lemma 3.2. Given k, let (γn ) be a sequence in Sk , and suppose that it
converges to some λ ⊂ Σ in the Hausdorff topology as n → ∞. Then
λ = λ0 ∪ A where λ0 is a lamination and A is the union of finitely many
geodesics g1 , . . . , gr such that for each i there exists j, possibly j = i, such
that gi and gj intersect transversely.
Proof. As we mentioned above, the Hausdorff limit λ is a union of (images
of) geodesics. We call a point x ∈ λ singular if there exist geodesics g, ḡ :
R → Σ parametrized by arc length with g(R), ḡ(R) ⊂ λ and such that
g(0) = ḡ(0) = x but ḡ 0 (0) 6= ±g 0 (0). Say that a geodesic with image in
λ is singular if it goes through a singular point and note that the same
argument used to prove that the closure of a set of simple disjoint geodesics
is a lamination (see Lemma 3.2 in [5]) shows that
18                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

     • any geodesic with image in λ and sufficiently close to a singular
       geodesic is singular as well,
     • λ has at most k singular points and hence, up to reparametrization,
       at most 2k singular geodesics, and
     • the union A of the images of the singular geodesics is open in its
       closure.
The last point implies that λ0 = λ \ A is closed and hence compact. Since
by construction λ0 does not contain any singular points, it is a lamination,
as we needed to prove.                                                    
   Equipped with this lemma we can construct radallas that carry all but
finitely many multicurves with bounded number of self-intersections. More-
over, we can do it in such a way that after fixing some arbitrary  > 0, each
radalla is -geodesic and only finitely many radallas are needed. The basic
idea is to construct, for each Hausdorff limit λ = λ0 ∪ A as in Lemma 3.2,
a train-track carrying the lamination λ0 in the usual way, and then add an
edge for each of the finite leaves in A.
Lemma 3.3. For any k and  > 0 there exists a finite collection of -geodesic
radallas τ̂1 , τ̂2 , . . . , τ̂n such that for all but finitely many γ ∈ Sk there is i
with γ ≺ τ̂i .
   Note that by definition the curves carried by an -geodesic radalla are
very long when  is small – this is because we assumed not only that the
edges have small geodesic curvature but also that they are very long. In
particular, once can think of the finite exceptional collection in Lemma 3.3
as the set of short curves in Sk .
Proof. Let Sk be the closure of Sk in the set of all compact subsets of Σ
with respect to the Hausdorff topology. Lemma 3.1 implies that Sk is itself
compact. Let λ ∈ Sk \ Sk be an accumulation point. Fixing an arbitrary
 > 0, we will construct an -geodesic radalla τ̂λ that carries all γ ∈ Sk that
are sufficiently (Hausdorff) close to λ. By Lemma 3.2, λ = λ0 ∪ A where
λ0 is a lamination and A is the finite set of singular leaves. Let 0 > 0 be
very small and take a regular 0 -neighborhood of λ and denote it by N (λ).
For each of the finitely many singular points in A take a 20 -ball around it
and let B be the union of these balls. Then N (λ) \ B admits a foliation
transversal to λ. Let γ be a geodesic multicurve which is a distance less than
0 from λ. This curve can be isotoped to a curve which remains transverse
to the foliation in N (λ) \ B and which follows the leaves of A inside each
ball in B. After isotoping each such curve in this manner, collapse N (λ)
along the transverse foliation (in N (λ) \ B) and to the leaves of A inside B.
This results in a radalla τ̂λ , where the associated train-track is the image of
λ0 under this collapse. By choosing 0 small enough, we can assume τ̂λ is
-geodesic.
   Note that, by construction, every multicurve in Sk contained in some open
neighborhood in Sk of λ is carried by the -geodesic radalla τ̂λ . Compactness
                                                                                19

of Sk implies that finitely many such open sets cover a neighborhood of Sk \Sk
in Sk . The claim follows.                                                  
3.2. Generic curves. Suppose Σ has genus g and r punctures. As in (3.1),
let Sk be the set of all multicurves in Σ with k self-intersections.
Definition. Let Z ⊂ Sk be arbitrary. A subset Z 0 ⊂ Z is negligible if
                         1
                 lim           |{γ ∈ Z 0 , `Σ (γ) ≤ L}| = 0
                L→∞ L6g−6+2r
The complement Z \ Z 0 of a negligible set Z 0 is said to be generic in Z.
  If Z 0 is generic in Z, and if the ambient set Z is understood from the
context, then we just say that Z 0 is generic.
Remark. Note that Z 0 ⊂ Z could be negligible and generic at the same time.
Note also that the image under a mapping class of a negligible set is also
negligible.
   In this section we prove that the set of all γ ∈ Sk which fill an almost
geodesic maximal radalla is generic. Here we say that a multicurve γ carried
by a radalla τ̂ fills if the corresponding vector of weights ωγ is positive,
meaning that ωγ (e) > 0 for every e ∈ E(τ̂ ). If γ fills τ̂ we write γ ≺fills τ̂ .
A radalla τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ ,→ Σ) is maximal if φ(τ ) is a maximal recurrent
train-track. Recall that a train-track τ is recurrent if it is filled by some
multicurve. A recurrent train-track is maximal if it is not properly contained
in any other recurrent train-track.
Remark. If Σ is not a once-punctured torus, then the complementary regions
of a maximal train-track are just triangles and once-punctured monogons
(see section 5 for a discussion of the case of the once punctured torus). It
follows that if Σ is closed, then all complementary regions of a maximal
recurrent train-track are triangles, which in turn implies that a maximal
radalla is nothing but a maximal recurrent train-track.
  We can now state precisely the main goal of this section:
Proposition 3.4. For any  > 0, the set
      Sk = {γ ∈ Sk | γ ≺fills τ̂ for some maximal -geodesic radalla τ̂ }
is a generic subset of Sk .
  Proposition 3.4 is going to follow easily from Lemma 3.3 once we deter-
mine “how many” multicurves in Sk are carried by each radalla:
Lemma 3.5. Let Σ be a hyperbolic surface of genus g with r punctures, let
(τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) be a radalla, and suppose that the underlying train-track
τ is trivalent and is not properly contained in any other τ 0 ⊂ τ̂ such that
(τ̂ , τ 0 , φ : τ̂ # Σ) is a radalla. Then we have
                                                                  
                                1        γ multicurve, γ ≺fills τ̂
               C = lim sup 6g−6+2r                                   <∞
                     L→∞ L               ι(γ, γ) = k, `Σ (γ) ≤ L
20                  VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

for every k ∈ N. Moreover C = 0 unless φ(τ ) is a maximal recurrent train-
track.
Proof. Given a multicurve γ ∈ Sk carried by τ̂ let `τ̂ (γ) be the length of
some, and hence any, immersion homotopic to γ and of the form φ ◦ γ 0
where
                              γ 0 : S1 t · · · t S1 → τ̂ .
As mentioned earlier, lifts to the universal cover of curves carried by a radalla
are bi-lipschitz embeddings where the bi-lipschitz constant is uniform. It
follows that it suffices to prove that
                                                                 
           0                1           γ multicurve, γ ≺fills τ̂
         C = lim sup 6g−6+2r                                        <∞
                L→∞ L                   ι(γ, γ) = k, `τ̂ (γ) ≤ L
and that C 0 = 0 unless φ(τ ) is a maximal recurrent train-track. Let c be an
upper bound for the length of the images φ(e) of the edges of τ̂ and note
that for any multicurve γ carried by τ̂ one has
                                `τ̂ (γ) ≤ c · kωγ k1
where k · k1 stands for the L1 -norm. Letting V denote the subset of NE(τ̂ )
consisting of solutions of the switch equations corresponding to some filling
multicurve γ with ι(γ, γ) = k we have thus
                                    
           γ multicurve, γ ≺fills τ̂
                                        ≤ K · |{ω ∈ V, kωk1 ≤ c · L}|
           ι(γ, γ) = k, `τ̂ (γ) ≤ L
where K is the constant provided by Proposition 2.1.
   Note that the assumption that the vectors ω ∈ V correspond to weights
of filling multicurves implies that each entry ω(e) is positive. Now, if e ∈
E(τ̂ ) \ E(τ ) is an edge which is not contained in the train-track part, then
there is another (possibly identical) edge e0 with ι(e, e0 ) ≥ 1. Recalling that
                         ω(e) · ω(e0 ) · ι(e, e0 ) ≤ ι(γ, γ)
for any γ with ωγ = ω we get that
                                     ω(e) ≤ k
for every ω ∈ V and every edge e in τ̂ \ τ . This implies that V is contained
in finitely many translates of the set WZ of integral points in the linear
subspace
      W = {ω ∈ RE(τ ) | solution of the switch equations in τ } ⊂ RE(τ̂ )
of solutions of the switch equations supported by the train-track τ . It follows
that there is some C with
          |{ω ∈ V, kωk1 ≤ c · L}| ≤ C |{ω ∈ WZ , kωk1 ≤ c · L}|
The linear space W is defined over Z, and this implies that the number of
integer points in W grows like a polynomial of degree equal to its dimension
dimR (W). Since, as it is well-known, dimR (W) ≤ 6g − 6 + 2r with equality
if and only if τ is a maximal recurrent train-track, the claim follows.    
                                                                               21

  We can now prove Proposition 3.4:
Proof of Proposition 3.4. By Lemma 3.3 there are, for all , finitely many
-geodesic radallas τ̂1 , . . . , τ̂n which carry all but finitely many curves in
Sk . Since each radalla contains only finitely many other radallas, we can
assume, up to adding finitely many radallas to our list, that the radallas τ̂i
satisfy the condition in Lemma 3.5 and that for all but finitely many γ ∈ Sk
there is some i with γ ≺fills τ̂i . Now, it follows from Lemma 3.5 that the set
of those multicurves carried and filling a non-maximal radalla is negligible.
The claim follows because the finite union of negligible sets is negligible. 
  Note at this point that in fact it follows from Lemma 3.5 and from the
argument used in the proof of Proposition 3.4 that set Sk has at most poly-
nomial growth of degree L6g−6+2r :
                           1
               lim sup 6g−6+2r |{γ ∈ Sk |`Σ (γ) ≤ L}| < ∞
                 L→∞ L
A lower bound of the same order of magnitude can be obtained just by
adding crossings to the simple multicurves carried by some maximal recur-
rent train-track, but it is anyways due to Sapir [20, 21]:
Corollary 3.6. Let Σ be a hyperbolic surface of genus g and r punctures.
Then there is C ≥ 1 with
                   1      1
                     ≤ 6g−6+2r |{γ ∈ Sk |`Σ (γ) ≤ L}| ≤ C
                  C     L
for all L large enough.                                               
3.3. Angles. We prove Theorem 1.2 from the introduction next:
Theorem 1.2. Let Σ be a closed hyperbolic surface of genus g ≥ 2 and
let ](γ) ∈ (0, π2 ] denote the largest angle among the self-intersections of a
multicurve γ ⊂ Σ. Then
                                                           
                     1       γ ⊂ Σ multicurve, ι(γ, γ) = k,
            lim                                                =0
           L→∞ L6g−6              ](γ) ≥ δ, `Σ (γ) ≤ L
for every k and every δ > 0.
Proof. Given δ > 0 there is  with ](γ) < δ for every multicurve γ carried
by some -geodesic train-track. In other words, the set
                      Sk,]<δ = {γ ∈ Sk with ](γ) < δ}
contains the set
(3.2)     {γ ∈ Sk | γ ≺fills τ for some maximal -geodesic train-track τ }
of all multicurves with k self-intersections which fill some -geodesic train-
track. As noted earlier, the assumption that Σ is closed implies that a
maximal radalla is in fact a maximal recurrent train-track. It follows thus
from Proposition 3.4 that the set (3.2) is generic in Sk .                  
22                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

   Theorem 1.2 fails if Σ is not closed. We can in fact divide the self-
intersections into two types which we refer to as small and large. Supposing
hat Σ is not a once punctured torus (see section 5 for this case) and with no-
tation as in Proposition 3.4, let τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ # Σ) be a maximal -geodesic
radalla which is filled by some curve with k self-intersections. Since τ̂ is max-
imal, and since we are assuming that Σ is not a once-punctured torus, it
follows that all the complementary regions of φ(τ ) are either triangles or
once punctured monogons. If  is small enough they are indeed almost ideal
triangles and almost ideal once-punctured monogons. The ideal triangles
cannot contain any additional leaves of φ(τ̂ ) but the punctured monogons
can have one or several such leaves which then have self-intersections with
relatively large angles. In fact, a simple computation in hyperbolic geometry
yields that if  is small enough then every intersection between leaves e, e0 of
a maximal -geodesic radalla happen at an angle greater than k1 whenever
k ≥ ι(e, e) and k ≥ ι(e0 , e0 ).
   Moreover, as long as  is chosen small enough we get as in the proof of
Theorem 1.2 that the self-intersection angles of a geodesic multicurve carried
by an -geodesic τ̂ are close to those of the representative in the radalla. In
other words we get:
Lemma 3.7. Suppose that Σ is not a once-punctured torus. For every k
and δ positive there is  such that if γ ⊂ Σ is a multicurve with ι(γ, γ) = k
and which is carried by a maximal -geodesic radalla, then γ has no self-
intersection with angle in [δ, k1 ].                                       
   We will refer to intersections with angle larger than k1 as being large. The
remaining ones are small. Recall that it follows from the argument leading
to Lemma 3.7 that, as long as  is small enough, large self-intersections of
multicurves γ ∈ Sk which are carried by a maximal -geodesic radalla τ̂
correspond to intersection points of (possibly equal) edges of the radalla.
3.4. The map. Still assuming that Σ is not a once punctured torus, fix
some k and δ with δ ≪ k1 and fix once and for all  positive but very small
satisfying Lemma 3.7.
   Our goal is to construct a map
                              π,k : Sk → MLZ (Σ)
from the set Sk of multicurves with k self-intersections carried by a maximal
-geodesic radalla, to the set MLZ (Σ) = S0 of simple multicurves – this map
will be the key to relate the growth of the number of self-intersecting curves
of some type to the growth of simple multicurves. To intuitively explain
the construction, suppose that all the self-intersections of γ ∈ Sk are small.
In this case we let π,k (γ) ∈ MLZ (Σ) be the multicurve obtained from γ
by resolving the self-intersections in such a way that γ and π,k (γ) remain
almost parallel.
   Consider now the general case. Suppose that we are given γ ∈ Sk and a
maximal -geodesic radalla τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ : τ̂ ,→ Σ) with γ ≺fills τ̂ . We start by
                                                                              23

associating to γ a simple multicurve πτ̂ (γ) with the help of the radalla. As
before, let E(τ̂ ) be the set of edges of τ̂ and E(τ ) ⊂ E(τ̂ ) the set of edges
of the associated train-track. Recall that we are assuming that Σ is not a
once-punctured torus. As we mentioned before, this implies that each edge
in E(τ̂ ) \ E(τ ) is contained in some punctured monogon. In particular, we
can associate to each e ∈ E(τ̂ ) \ E(τ ) a locally embedded loop ẽ ⊂ τ in
the train-track with the same endpoint as e and whose image represents the
boundary of the punctured monogon containing e (see figure 6).




        Figure 6. The solid line on the left image is an edge e ∈
        E(τ̂ ) \ E(τ ) and on the right it represents the loop ẽ. In the
        middle we see an intermediate step given by deleting loops
        around the puncture.

  We denote by ωẽ ∈ RE(τ ) the vector of weights of ẽ and define a linear
map
(3.3)                         πτ̂ : RE(τ̂ ) → RE(τ )
as the identity on RE(τ ) ⊂ RE(τ̂ ) and as mapping the basis vector e ∈ RE(τ̂ )
to the vector ωẽ ∈ RE(τ ) for all e ∈ E(τ̂ ) \ E(τ ) (see figure 7).
    Note that this map can also be viewed as being induced by a smooth map
τ̂ → τ from the radalla to the train-track, where τ is fixed point-wise and
where each additional edge e ∈ E(τ̂ ) \ E(τ ) is mapped to the corresponding
path ẽ ⊂ τ . An alternative description: each edge e ∈ τ̂ \τ has one or several
loops around a puncture and we are cutting out such loops and homotopying
the obtained segment into the train-track (compare with figure 6).
    Anyways, we obtain thus a way to associate to each γ ≺fills τ̂ a simple
multicurve carried by the underlying train-track τ as follows: consider the
vector ωγ ∈ RE(τ̂ ) of weights associated to γ, apply πτ̂ as in (3.3) and let
πτ̂ (γ) ≺ τ be the simple multicurve with
                               ωπτ̂ (γ) = πτ̂ (ωγ ).
Next we give a different description of πτ̂ (γ) which does not use the radalla
τ̂ , just its existence.
     Recall that by Lemma 3.7, and by the choice of , we can divide the in-
tersection points of any γ ≺fills τ̂ into two types: small and large. We resolve
24                 VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO




        Figure 7. The map πτ̂ : each number is the weight of the
        edge underneath. The upper picture is in the radalla φ(τ̂ )
        and the lower in the train-track φ(τ ). The weights on the
        train-track are the images of the weights on the radalla under
        the map πτ̂ .




        Figure 8. The effect of the map π on a curve. In the
        picture, two small intersections and one large intersection
        have been resolved.

small intersections using the obvious local move: replace two intersecting
segments by two which are disjoint to each other and almost parallel to the
original ones (see figure 8). To resolve large intersections note that each one
of them corresponds to a loop around a puncture – we just remove all such
loops (see again figure 8). Proceeding like this for all intersection points we
obtain a simple multicurve γ0 which is in fact homotopic to the simple mul-
ticurve that we get applying πτ̂ (compare figure 7 and figure 8). It follows
                  def
thus that π,k (γ) = πτ̂ (γ) does not depend on the radalla τ̂ , meaning that
we have a well-defined map
(3.4)                         π,k : Sk → MLZ
                                                                                25

Remark. We stress that the only requirement that we put on  is that it
                                                                 1
satisfies Lemma 3.7 for some δ small enough, say for δ = 100k      . In fact,
we will not need to reduce  later on. However, the reader might find it
reassuring to observe that if 0 ≤ , then π,k |S 0 = π0 ,k .
                                                          k

     We establish some properties of the map (3.4). Suppose that τ̂ = (τ̂ , τ, φ :
τ̂ ,→ Σ) is a radalla and that η ⊂ Σ is a simple closed curve transversal to
τ̂ , by which we mean that both are in general position with respect to each
other and there are no proper smooth arcs I ⊂ η and J ⊂ τ̂ such that I
and φ(J) are isotopic to each other relative to their endpoints. Suppose also
that U is a complementary region of the train-track φ(τ ), and that U is a
punctured monogon. Then each component of η ∩ U meets the image φ(e)
exactly twice for each edge e ∈ E(τ̂ ) \ E(τ ) with φ(e) ⊂ U . It follows thus
directly from the definition of πτ̂ that
                X                        X
                     |η ∩ φ(e)| · ω(e) =     |η ∩ φ(e)| · (πτ̂ ω)(e)
              e∈E(τ̂ )                         e∈E(τ )

for every ω ∈ RE(τ̂ ) . Applying this to ω = ωγ for γ ≺fills τ̂ we get that
                                 X
                       ι(η, γ) =      |η ∩ φ(e)| · ω(e)
                                   e∈E(τ̂ )
                                    X
                               =              |η ∩ φ(e)| · (πτ̂ ω)(e)
                                   e∈E(τ )
                               = ι(η, π,k (γ)
where the first (resp. last) equality holds because η and γ (resp. π,k (γ))
are transversal. We record this fact:
Lemma 3.8. Suppose that τ̂ is an -geodesic radalla and that η ⊂ Σ is a
simple closed geodesic transversal to τ̂ . Then we have
                                ι(η, π,k (γ)) = ι(η, γ)
for every γ ∈ Sk with γ ≺fills τ̂ .                                            
   In some sense Lemma 3.8 asserts that γ and π,k (γ) are close to each
other. Compare with Fact 1 in the next section.
   Observe that the map (3.4) maps curves of some length to curves of
roughly the same length. By itself, this already implies that π,k is finite-
to-one. The main content of the following proposition is that it is actually
bounded-to-one:
                                       −1
Proposition 3.9. There is κ with |π,k    (γ)| ≤ κ for all γ ∈ MLZ . On the
other hand, if τ is an -geodesic maximal train-track, and φ ∈ Map(Σ) is a
                                               −1             −1
mapping class with φ(τ ) ≺ τ , then one has |π,k (φ(γ))| ≥ |π,k (γ)| for every
simple multicurve γ ≺fills τ .
26                    VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

Proof. Note that the image of π,k consists of simple multicurves which are
carried and fill some maximal -geodesic train-track. Given such a train-
                                                      −1
track τ and a simple multicurve γ ≺fills τ then π,k       (γ) consists of elements
      
of Sk which are carried by some radalla τ̂ extending τ . Recall also that
maximality of τ implies that the leaves e in τ̂ \ τ are contained in once-
punctured monogons – if r is the number of cusps, there are r such punctured
monogons. Each one of these leaves in a punctured monogon intersects
itself and in fact there are, up to isotopy, only k leaves with at most k
self-intersections. All this implies that there are at most r2k + 1 radallas τ̂
extending τ and which are filled by some curve in Sk .
    Hence, to prove the first claim it suffices to bound, for each one of these
radallas, the number of multicurves γ 0 ∈ Sk with γ 0 ≺fills τ̂ and π,k (γ 0 ) = γ.
Note that, by construction of the map, the weights ωγ 0 of each such curve
γ 0 belong to the preimage of the map in (3.3). Since ι(γ 0 , γ 0 ) = k and since
ι(e, e) ≥ 1 for each e ∈ E(τ̂ ) \ E(τ ) we get that ωγ 0 (e) ≤ k for any such edge.
It follows that ωγ 0 belongs to a collection of at most k 2 vectors in RE(τ̂ ) . By
Proposition 2.1 we know that there is some K such that each vector in E(τ̂ )
corresponds to at most K curves carried by τ̂ and with k self-intersections.
                          −1
Altogether we get that π,k  (γ) consists of at most κ = (r2k +1)k 2 K elements.
We have proved the first claim.
    To prove the second claim vote that it suffices to show that
                              π,k (φ(γ 0 )) = φ(π,k (γ 0 ))
                                                                                  −1
for every mapping class φ ∈ Map(Σ) with φ(τ ) ≺ τ , and every γ 0 ∈ π,k             (γ)
                                     0
for each γ ≺fills τ . Any such γ is carried by some radalla τ̂ extending the
train-track τ . Since φ(τ ) ≺ τ , we get that φ(τ̂ ) is carried by some radalla
τ̂ 0 extending τ . Note that τ̂ 0 can be isotoped to be -geodesic. Since we can
compute π,k (γ 0 ) and π,k (φ(γ 0 )) using the radallas τ̂ and τ̂ 0 , we get thus that
π,k (φ(γ 0 )) = φ(π,k (γ 0 )) = φ(γ), as we wanted to prove. This concludes the
proof of Proposition 3.9.                                                             
    Before moving on, note that the bound we gave in the proof of the first
claim of Proposition 3.9 is rather brutal. In fact, in the absence of cusps we
can replace the bound by the constant K from Proposition 2.1. Moreover,
in the cases when we computed K explicitly (i.e. k = 1, 2) after the proof of
Proposition 2.1 one can give a formula, even in the presence of cusps, for the
number of preimages. To see this, let τ be a maximal -geodesic train-track
and γ a simple multicurve carried by and filling τ . Suppose moreover that
ωγ (e) ≥ 10 for every edge e ∈ E(τ ). Consider the case of k = 1 and let
         −1
γ 0 ∈ π,1  (γ) ⊂ S1 . Then γ 0 ≺fills τ̂ for some radalla τ 0 extending τ . Since
τ is maximal, any leaf of τ̂ \ τ is contained in one of the r once-punctured
monogons. Since γ 0 fills τ̂ and has exactly one self-intersection it follows that
there is at most one edge in τ̂ \ τ and hence there are (up to isotopy) exactly
r + 1 such radallas. Now, if γ 0 ≺fills τ̂ where τ̂ 6= τ then (the homotopy class
of) γ 0 is uniquely determined by τ̂ . If instead τ̂ = τ there are, as explained in
                                                                             27

the discussion following the proof of Proposition 2.1, V2 choices for γ 0 where
V = 12g − 12 + 4r is the number of vertices of the maximal train-track τ .
                   −1
Hence we have |π,1   (γ)| = 6g − 6 + 3r. A similar computation can be made
for the case k = 2 and we record the resulting count here, but leave the
proof to the reader.
Lemma 3.10. Suppose that Σ has genus g and r punctures and is not
homeomorphic to a once punctured torus. For some  small enough, let τ
be a maximal recurrent -geodesic train-track and γ ≺ τ a simple multicurve
which traverses each edge of τ at least 10 times, that is ωγ (e) ≥ 10 for all
e ∈ E(τ ). Then we have
          −1
     • |π,1 (γ)| = 6g − 6 + 3r.
          −1
     • |π,2 (γ)| = 92 (2g + r)(2g + r − 3) + 2 .
                                               
                                                                           

                                     4.
   Suppose that Σ is a hyperbolic surface other than a punctured torus and
fix some natural number k – the case of the torus with be discussed in section
5. We also fix γ0 ∈ Sk , i.e. a multicurve in Σ with ι(γ0 , γ0 ) = k, and let
                           Sγ0 = Map(Σ) · γ0 ⊂ Sk
be the set of curves of type γ0 . In this section we associate to this set and
to every L > 0 a measure νγL0 on the space C(Σ) of currents on Σ. We
will show that every accumulation point of νγL0 when L → ∞ is a multiple
of the Thurston measure µThu on the subspace ML(Σ) of C(Σ) consisting
of measured laminations. We will moreover prove that the existence of an
actual limit is equivalent to the existence of the limit (1.1). We begin by
recalling a few facts on currents, measured laminations, and the Thurston
measure. Before doing so we refer to [5, 22, 7] for basic facts on measured
laminations (or equivalently, measured foliations) and their relation to train-
tracks, and to [2, 3, 4, 15] for basic facts on currents and their relation to
laminations. Both laminations and currents are treated in the extremely
readable paper [1].
4.1. Currents. The total space P T Σ of the projective tangent bundle of
Σ has a 1-dimensional foliation, the geodesic foliation, whose leaves are
the traces of geodesics in Σ. This foliation is intrinsic in the sense that
any homeomorphism Σ → Σ0 between hyperbolic (or even just negatively
curved) surfaces induces a homeomorphism P T Σ → P T Σ0 which maps the
geodesic foliation on P T Σ to the geodesic foliation on P T Σ0 . This is basi-
cally the well-known fact that geodesic flows on homeomorphic negatively
curved manifolds of finite volume are orbit equivalent to each other.
   A geodesic current is a Radon transverse measure to the geodesic foliation.
Equivalently a geodesic current is a π1 (Σ)-invariant Radon measure on the
space G(Σ̃) of geodesic in the universal cover Σ̃ of Σ. Also, geodesic currents
are in one-to-one correspondence with Radon measures invariant under both
28                    VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

the geodesic flow and the geodesic flip. Recall that a Borel measure is Radon
if it is locally finite and inner regular.
    We denote the space of all geodesic currents endowed with the weak-*-
topology by C(Σ). If Σ → Σ0 is a homotopy equivalence, then the map
C(Σ) → C(Σ0 ) between the spaces of currents induced by the foliation pre-
serving homeomorphism P T Σ → P T Σ0 is also a homeomorphism. In par-
ticular, the mapping class group Map(Σ) acts on C(Σ) by homeomorphisms.
    If K ⊂ P T Σ is a compact set invariant under the geodesic flow, i.e. K is
saturated with respect to the geodesic foliation, let
                      CK (Σ) = {λ ∈ C(Σ)|λ(P T Σ \ K) = 0}
denote the set of currents (considered as measures invariant under the ge-
odesic flow) supported by K. We will be interested in currents supported
by a compact set because by Lemma 3.1 all curves in Sγ0 live in a fixed
compact set. On the other hand, currents such as the Liouville current λΣ
associated to the hyperbolic metric of Σ belongs to some CK (Σ) only if Σ
itself is compact.
   Every primitive curve (and in fact, every multicurve) in Σ can be consid-
ered as a current: namely the Dirac measure centred at the said curve. In
this way we can see the set S = S(Σ) of all multicurves in Σ as a subset
of the space C(Σ) of currents. In fact, it is known that the set R+ S of all
weighted multicurves is dense in C(Σ). Moreover, when Σ is closed, then the
geometric intersection number S × S → N extends uniquely to a continu-
ous symmetric map C(Σ) × C(Σ) → R+ . In the presence of cusps things
are more complicated, for instance because the map might take the value
∞. Anyways, the standard argument [2] proves that for every compact set
K ⊂ P T Σ invariant under the geodesic flow we have that
(4.1)                         ι : C(Σ) × CK (Σ) → R+
takes finite values and is continuous. Moreover, ι(a · λ, b · µ) = ab · ι(λ, µ)
whenever a, b ∈ R+ are positive reals and λ ∈ C(Σ) and µ ∈ CK (Σ) are
currents. The map (4.1) is called the intersection form. Note that if Σ →
Σ0 is again a homotopy equivalence between hyperbolic surfaces, then the
homeomorphism C(Σ) → C(Σ0 ) commutes with the scaling action of R+
and with the intersection form. In particular, the intersection form (4.1) is
invariant under the mapping class group of the surface.
   We list a few facts on the intersection form (4.1):
        • If λΣ is the Liouville current of the hyperbolic metric on Σ then
                                  ι(λΣ , γ) = `Σ (γ)
          for every multicurve γ ⊂ Σ.
        • A current µ is filling if every geodesic in Σ is transversally intersected
          by some geodesic in the support of µ. For instance, if γ ∈ S is a filling
          multicurve in the sense that it cuts Σ into polygons and punctured
                                                                                  29

        monogons, then γ is also filling as a current. The Liouville current
        λΣ is also filling.
      • If λ is a filling current and K ⊂ P T Σ is compact, then the set
        {µ ∈ CK (Σ)|ι(λ, µ) ≤ 1} is compact in CK (Σ).
      • For any compact set K ⊂ P T Σ invariant under the geodesic flow,
        and for any two filling currents µ, λ ∈ C(Σ), there is some L with
                           1
                             ι(µ, η) ≤ ι(λ, η) ≤ Lι(µ, η)
                          L
        for every η ∈ CK (Σ).
See the references given earlier for proofs, keeping in mind that we are re-
stricting (4.1) on the second factor to compactly supported currents. Under
this restriction, the proofs are exactly the same as in the case that Σ is
closed.
   As above, suppose that γ0 ∈ Sk is a multicurve in Σ with ι(γ0 , γ0 ) = k,
and let
                             Sγ0 = Map(Σ) · γ0 ⊂ Sk
be the set of curves of type γ0 . Consider the elements of Sγ0 as currents on
Σ and let K ⊂ P T Σ be a compact set, given by Lemma 3.1, such that
(4.2)                                Sγ0 ⊂ CK (Σ).
For L > 0 we consider the measure
                                         1      X
(4.3)                       νγL0 =                      δ1γ
                                     L6g−6+2r            L
                                                γ∈Sγ0

on CK (Σ) ⊂ C(Σ), where δx stands for the Dirac measure centered at x.
The goal of the sequel is to study the behavior of the measures νγL0 when
L tends to ∞. Among other things we will prove that every accumulation
point of νγL0 when L → ∞ is a multiple of the Thurston measure on µThu on
the subspace of C(Σ) consisting of measured laminations.
4.2. Measured laminations. Recall that a measured lamination is a lam-
ination endowed with a transverse measure of full support. As such, a mea-
sured lamination is also a current. In fact, a current λ ∈ C(Σ) is a measured
lamination if and only if ι(λ, λ) = 0. Noting that laminations are contained
in the compact set provided by Lemma 3.1, we can see the space ML(Σ) of
all measured laminations on Σ is thus a subset of CK (Σ) with the same K
as in (4.2):
(4.4)                           ML(Σ) ⊂ CK (Σ).
Being a subset of C(Σ), the space ML(Σ) of measured laminations has an
induced topology. In fact, Thurston proved that ML(Σ) is homeomorphic
to R6g−6+2r . Moreover, similar to the classical Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates,
there is a finite collection (see for instance [8]) of simple curves η1 , . . . , ηs
such that
(4.5)               if ι(λ, ηi ) = ι(µ, ηi ) for all i then λ = µ
30                 VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

for any two λ, µ ∈ ML(Σ). Note that the collection of curves η1 , . . . , ηs is
very far from being unique – for instance, transforming this collection via a
mapping class we get a new collection with the same property.
   The space ML(Σ) has not only a natural topology, but also a compatible
mapping class group invariant integral PL-manifold structure. Here, inte-
gral means that the change of charts are given by linear transformations
with integral coefficients. In particular, the set of integral points in ML(Σ)
is well-defined. In fact, for every recurrent train-track τ in Σ one has the
simplex in ML(Σ) consisting of all measured laminations carried by τ –
the integral points in this simplex correspond simply to the integral solu-
tions of the weight equations. It follows that the set of integral points of
ML(Σ) is just the set MLZ (Σ) of simple multicurves in Σ. Note before
going further that the set of measured laminations carried by a train-track
τ is full-dimensional if and only if τ is a maximal recurrent train-track.
   The PL-manifold ML(Σ) is in fact endowed with a mapping class group
invariant symplectic structure [17] and hence with a mapping class group
invariant measure in the Lebesgue class. This measure is the so-called
Thurston measure µThu . It is an infinite but locally finite measure, posi-
tive on non-empty open sets, and satisfying
                      µThu (L · U ) = L6g−6+2r µThu (U )
for all U ⊂ ML(Σ) and L > 0. Note that this implies that µThu (A) = 0 if
A ∩ L · A = ∅ for all L > 0. In particular,
                    µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) = 1}) = 0
for every filling current λ0 ∈ C(Σ).
   On charts, the measure µThu is just the standard Lebesgue measure and
the integral points of ML(Σ) are just points in the integral lattice. Hence
we get, under weak assumptions on U , that the Thurston measure of a set
U can be computed by counting the integral points in L · U , dividing by the
appropriate power of L, and letting L go to ∞. In a more succinct way
                                      1      X
                       µThu = lim 6g−6+2r         δ1γ
                               L→∞ L               L
                                             γ∈MLZ

where δx is as always the Dirac measured centered at x. Finally, but most
crucially, it is a theorem of Masur [10] that µThu is invariant and ergodic
under the action of the mapping class group.
4.3. Sub-convergence of the measures νγL0 . As we mentioned earlier, we
are interested in the behavior of the measures νγL0 defined in (4.3) when L
grows. Our first goal is to prove that any accumulation point is a multiple
of the Thurston measure µThu :
Proposition 4.1. Any sequence (Ln )n of positive numbers with Ln → ∞
                                                   Ln
has a subsequence (Lni )i such that the measures (νγ0 i )i converge in the
weak-*-topology to the measure α · µThu on ML(Σ) ⊂ C(Σ) for some α > 0.
                                                                                 31

    In preparation to prove Proposition 4.1 fix  as in the beginning of section
3.4 and consider the corresponding set Sγ0 of those elements in Sγ0 which
fill a maximal -geodesic radalla. Let
                      π,γ0 = π,k |Sγ : Sγ0 → MLZ (Σ)
                                     0

be the restriction of the map (3.4) to Sγ0 .
   In order to prove Proposition 4.1 we will make use of another family of
measures on C(Σ):
                               1       X
                                                −1
(4.6)               µL,γ0 = 6g−6+2r          |π,γ0
                                                     (γ)|δ 1 γ
                            L                              L
                                         γ∈MLZ

The measures νγL0   and µL
                         ,γ0  are closely related to each other, and in fact
the first step of the proof of Proposition 4.1 is to show that the asymptotic
behaviors of the measures νγL0 and µL ,γ0 are identical:

Lemma 4.2. Let (Ln )n be a sequence tending to ∞. If one of the limits
                            lim µL n           Ln
                                 ,γ0 and lim νγ0
                           n→∞              n→∞
exists with respect to the weak-*-topology on the space of locally finite mea-
sures on the space of currents C(Σ), then the other also exists and both
agree.
  Note that it follows from (4.2) and (4.4) that the measures νγL0 and µL
                                                                        ,γ0
are all supported by CK (Σ) for some fixed compact set K ⊂ P T Σ – we will
use this fact a number of times in the following pages.
Proof. It will be convenient to consider the restriction of the measure νγL0 to
the set L1 Sγ0 :
                           L         1      X
(4.7)                    ν,γ 0
                                = 6g−6+2r        δ1γ
                                 L             
                                                  L
                                            γ∈Sγ0

Since the set Sγ0 \ Sγ0 is negligible by Proposition 3.4, we have that
                     1
            lim            |{γ ∈ Sγ0 \ Sγ0 |ι(λΣ , γ) ≤ C · Ln }| = 0
            n→∞ L6g−6+2r
                 n
for all C > 0. Here λΣ is the Liouville current of the hyperbolic metric on
Σ and we remind the reader that `Σ (γ) = ι(λΣ , γ) for every multicurve γ.
By the very definition of the measures νγL0 and ν,γ
                                                   L , this means that the
                                                     0
difference
  νγL0n ({λ ∈ CK (Σ)|ι(λΣ , λ) ≤ C}) − ν,γ
                                        Ln
                                            0
                                              ({λ ∈ CK (Σ)|ι(λΣ , λ) ≤ C}) → 0
of measures tends to 0 when n grows. Since, varying C, the sets {λ ∈
CK (Σ)|ι(λΣ , λ) ≤ C} form a compact exhaustion of CK (Σ) we deduce that
whenever one of the limits
                            lim ν Ln and lim νγL0n
                           n→∞ ,γ0      n→∞
32                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

exists, then the other also exists and both agree.
   It follows that it suffices to prove that limn→∞ ν,γLn = µ if and only if
                                                           0
limn→∞ µL    n = µ. Note that µL
           ,γ0                   ,γ0 is the push-forward                  L
                                                            of the measure ν,γ0
under the map
                   L        1          1     1
                  π,γ  :    S → ML(Σ),   γ 7→ π,γ0 (γ).
                      0
                            L γ0        L     L
                                                                     L , when
In particular, the desired result follows easily once we prove that π,γ0
L is large, almost does not move points. More precisely, fixing for the sake
of concreteness a distance d : CK (Σ) × CK (Σ) → R+ inducing the topology
of CK (Σ) (see [6] for a concrete choice), we prove:
Fact 1. For all C, ρ > 0 there is L0 with
                                        
                             1     L     1
                         d     γ, π,γ0    γ ≤ρ
                             L           L
for every γ ∈ Sγ0 (Σ) with ι(λΣ , γ) ≤ C · L and for every L ≥ L0 .
Proof. We argue by contradiction: Suppose there exist C, ρ positive, a se-
quence Ln → ∞, and a sequence γn ∈ Sγ0 with ι(λΣ , γ) ≤ C · Ln satisfying
                                                                   
d L1n γ, π,γ
            Ln     1
                     γ    ≥ ρ. Both  sequences    1
                                                    γ
                                                 Ln n    and    π Ln   1
                                                                         γ
                                                                 ,γ0 Ln n    =
             0
                Ln
   1
  Ln π,γ0 (γn ) are contained in the compact set {λ ∈ CK (Σ)|ι(λΣ , λ) ≤ C}.
It follows, by passing to a subsequence, that we can assume that they con-
verge:
                                         
                  1                   1         1
                               Ln
                     γn → µ, π,γ0      γn =      π,γ0 (γn ) → µ0 .
                 Ln                  Ln        Ln
By construction, µ0 is a limit of simple curves and hence it is a measured
lamination. On the other hand, by continuity of the intersection form we
have
                                 
                      1       1            ι(γn , γn )       ι(γ0 , γ0 )
   ι(µ, µ) = lim ι      γn ,    γn = lim        2
                                                       = lim             = 0,
            n→∞      Ln      Ln      n→∞      Ln        n→∞     L2n
proving that also µ ∈ ML(Σ).
   Recall that by Lemma 3.3 and the definition of Sγ0 , there is a finite set
of -geodesic radallas carrying all curves in Sγ0 . In particular, by passing to
a further subsequence, we can assume there is a fixed -geodesic radalla τ̂
with γn ≺ τ̂ for all n. Let τ ⊂ τ̂ be the underlying train-track, and η1 , . . . , ηs
curves transversal to τ and satisfying (4.5). Since ηi is transversal to τ̂ we
get from Lemma 3.8 that
                             ι(γn , ηi ) = ι(π,γ0 (γn ), ηi )
for all n. The continuity of the intersection form implies that
                                 ι(µ, ηi ) = ι(µ0 , ηi ).
                                                                                 33

Since i was arbitrary we have µ = µ0 by (4.5). But this implies that L1n γn
      Ln ( 1 γ ) have the same limit and hence that their distance tends to
and π,γ0 Ln n
0, contradicting our assumption. We have proved Fact 1.                  
   Now, suppose that f : CK (Σ) → R is continuous with compact support,
and note that there is some C such that the interior of the compact set
Z = {λ ∈ CK (Σ)|ι(λΣ , λ) ≤ C} contains the support of f . Note also that f is
uniformly continuous, meaning that for all 0 there is ρ with |f (α)−f (α0 )| ≤
0 whenever d(α, α0 ) ≤ ρ. This means that with L0 as in Fact 1 and for all
Ln ≥ L0 and all γ ∈ Sγ0 we have
                                             
                          1          Ln     1
                     f      γ − f π,γ0        γ     ≤ 0
                         Ln                Ln
Since µL                                            L            L
       ,γ0 is the push-forward of the measure ν,γ0 under π,γ0 , this implies
that
       Z                          Z
                f (λ)dµL n
                       ,γ0 (λ) −            Ln
                                      f (λ)dν,γ 0
                                                             Ln
                                                   (λ) ≤ 0 ν,γ 0
                                                                   (Z) and
         CK (Σ)                       CK (Σ)
       Z                              Z
                  f (λ)dµL
                         ,γ0 (λ) −
                           n                          Ln
                                               f (λ)dν,γ 0
                                                            (λ) ≤ 0 µL n
                                                                      ,γ0 (Z)
         CK (Σ)                       CK (Σ)

for any 0 small enough. If limn→∞ ν,γLn = µ, we get that ν Ln (Z) is bounded
                                         0                   ,γ0
independently of n. Since 0 was arbitrary we get thus that
                  Z                        Z                    !
            lim         f (λ)dµL,γ0 (λ) −
                                  n                     Ln
                                                f (λ)dν,γ0
                                                            (λ) = 0
           n→∞       CK (Σ)                        CK (Σ)

which implies, because f was arbitrary, that also limn→∞ µL
                                                          ,γ0 = µ.
                                                            n

                                                     L
  The same argument proves also that if limn→∞ µ,γn0 = µ then we also
               Ln = µ.
have limn→∞ ν,γ                                                    
                 0

  We are finally ready to prove Proposition 4.1:
Proof of Proposition 4.1. To begin we prove that the sequence (µL ,γ0 )n has a
                                                                    n

convergent subsequence. In order to do so it suffices to prove that for every
compact set K ⊂ ML(Σ) with µThu (∂K) = 0 the sequence (µL        ,γ0 (K))n is
                                                                   n

bounded.
   Note that
                                 1        X
                                                     −1
                   µL n
                    ,γ0 (K) = 6g−6+2r             |π,γ0
                                                          (λ)|
                              Ln        MLZ ∩Ln ·K
                                 κ
                             ≤ 6g−6+2r |MLZ ∩ Ln · K|
                              Ln
where κ is the constant provided by Proposition 3.9. Since the last quantity
converges to κ · µThu (K) when n → ∞, it follows that our original sequence
is bounded, as we needed to prove. At this point we know that the sequence
               Ln ) contains a subsequence (µLni ) which converges to some
of measures (µ,γ 0 n                         ,γ0 i
34                     VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

measure µ. Moreover, since µ(K) ≤ κ · µThu (K) for every K we deduce that
the limit µ is absolutely continuous with respect to the Thurston measure,
with Radon-Nikodym derivative dµdµ  Thu
                                        bounded by κ.
  Note at this point that it follows from Lemma 4.2 that we also have
                                         Ln
                                   lim νγ0 i = µ.
                                   i→∞

This means that it only remains to be proved that the Radon-Nikodym de-
                                                                 Ln
rivative dµdµ
            Thu
                 is essentially constant. To that end note that νγ0 i is invariant
under the mapping class group, since for all U ⊂ C(Σ) and all φ ∈ Map(Σ)
we have
         Ln            Ln                1
     φ∗ νγ0 i (U ) = νγ0 i (φ(U )) = 6g−6+2r |Sγ0 ∩ φ(Lni · U )|
                                     Lni
                          1                             1
                   = 6g−6+2r |φ−1 Sγ0 ∩ Lni · U | = 6g−6+2r |Sγ0 ∩ Lni · U |
                      Lni                           Lni
                       Ln
                   = νγ0 i (U ).
This implies that the measure µ is also invariant under the mapping class
group. Hence, the Radon-Nikodym derivative dµdµ  Thu
                                                     is a mapping class group
invariant measurable function on ML(Σ). Since the Thurston measure µThu
is ergodic with respect to the mapping class group action [10], it follows that
  dµ
dµThu is essentially constant as we needed to prove.                         

4.4. Limits of measures and counting. After the hard work of proving
Proposition 4.1 we can reap some of its consequences. They are all based
on the following simple observation:
Proposition 4.3. Let (Ln )n be a sequence with limn→∞ νγL0n = α · µThu for
some α ∈ R+ . Then
            |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ0 , γ) ≤ Ln }|
      lim                                = α · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1})
     n→∞           Ln 6g−6+2r
for every filling current λ0 ∈ C(Σ).
Proof. We have that
         |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ0 , γ) ≤ Ln }|
     lim                              = lim νγL0n ({λ ∈ CK (Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1})
     n→∞        Ln 6g−6+2r              n→∞
                                      = α · µThu ({λ ∈ CK (Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1})
                                      = α · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1}).

Here the first equality follows from the very definition of the measures νγL0 .
The second equality follows from the assumption in the proposition because
as we noted earlier µThu ({λ ∈ CK (Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) = 1}) = 0. Finally, the last
equality holds because µThu is supported by ML(Σ).                          
                                                                                35

   We will later prove that the limit limL→∞ νγL0 actually exists if Σ is a
once-punctured torus, which in light of Proposition 4.3 will mean that the
                             |{γ∈Sγ0 |ι(λ0 ,γ)≤L}|
corresponding limit limL→∞            L2
                                                   also exists. For a general sur-
face we only prove that the following weaker statement:
Corollary 4.4. Let Σ be a hyperbolic surface of finite area, and let λ1 , λ2 ∈
C(Σ) be filling currents. Then we have
            |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ1 , γ) ≤ L}|
                                    µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ1 , λ) ≤ 1})
      lim                                =
     L→∞ |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ2 , γ) ≤ L}| µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ2 , λ) ≤ 1})
for every multicurve γ0 in Σ. Here µThu is as always the Thurston measure
on the space of measured laminations ML(Σ).
Proof. It suffices to prove that every sequence (Ln ) has a subsequence (Lni )
for which the claimed equality holds. Well, from Proposition 4.1 we know
                                             Ln
that (Ln ) has a subsequence for which νγ0 i converges to α · µThu for some
α > 0. Thus by Proposition 4.3 we get that
        |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ1 , γ) ≤ Lni }|
    lim                               = α · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ1 , λ) ≤ 1})
   i→∞           Lni 6g−6+2r
and that
        |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ2 , γ) ≤ Lni }|
    lim                               = α · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ2 , λ) ≤ 1})
   i→∞           Lni 6g−6+2r
The claim follows by taking the quotient of these two equations.             
  As we mentioned in the introduction, combining Corollary 4.4 and the
work of Mirzakhani [14] one gets immediately that the limit
                               |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ0 , γ) ≤ L}|
                           lim
                         L→∞          L6g−6+2r
exists for every multicurve γ0 and every filling current λ0 . It is thus natural
to wonder if more generally the limit
                       |{f (α)|f ∈ Map(Σ), ι(λ0 , f (α)) ≤ L}|
(4.8)              lim
                  L→∞                  L6g−6+2r
also exists for currents α ∈ C(Σ) other than those arising from multicurves.
This is indeed the case. To explain why, suppose for the sake of concreteness
that Σ is closed of genus g, that α ∈ C(Σ) has trivial stabilizer in the mapping
class group, and consider for L > 0 the measure
                                   1       X
                          ναL = 6g−6              δ 1 f (α)
                                 L                  L
                                         f ∈Map(Σ)

on the space of currents. Noting that there is some K ≥ 1 with
                     1
                        · ι(λ, λΣ ) ≤ ι(λ, α) ≤ K · ι(λ, λΣ )
                    K
for all λ ∈ C(Σ), we get that the ναL -measure of the compact sets {λ ∈
C(Σ)|ι(λ, λΣ ) ≤ C} is bounded from above for all C by some number which
36                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

does not depend on L. It follows that every sequence (ναLn )n has a convergent
subsequence. Moreover, as in the proof of Proposition 4.3 we have that if
ναLn converges to µ then
           |{f ∈ Map(Σ)|ι(λ0 , f (α)) ≤ Ln }|
     lim                                        = µ({λ ∈ C(Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1})
     n→∞                 L6g−6
                          n
In particular, to prove that the limit (4.8) exists it suffices to prove that the
quantity
(4.9)                     µ({λ ∈ C(Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1})
does not depend on the particular sequence Ln . Well, we want to prove the
independence of (4.9) for every every filling current λ0 , but since weighted
currents corresponding to multicurves are dense in C(Σ), it suffices to prove
it for multicurves λ0 , which we moreover might assume to be filling and with
trivial stabilizer in the mapping class group. In this case we have that
                                            |{f ∈ Map(Σ)|ι(λ0 , f (α)) ≤ Ln }|
     µ({λ ∈ C(Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1}) = lim
                                      n→∞               Ln6g−6
                                            |{f ∈ Map(Σ)|ι(α, f (λ0 )) ≤ Ln }|
                                   = lim
                                      n→∞                  Ln6g−6
                                            |{γ ∈ Sλ0 |ι(α, γ) ≤ Ln }|
                                   = lim
                                      n→∞          Ln6g−6
where the second equality holds because the intersection form is symmetric
and invariant under the mapping class group – the third limit is just a
rewriting of the second one. However, from the work of Mirzakhani [14] and
Corollary 4.4 we get that the third limit does not depend on the sequence
Ln . It follows thus that the limit (4.8) exists, as claimed.

4.5. Criteria for convergence. We discuss now some conditions ensuring
that the measures νγL0 converge when L → ∞. Note that by Lemma 4.2
it suffices to give conditions ensuring the convergence of the measures µL
                                                                         ,γ0
defined in (4.6). The first basic observation is the following:
Lemma 4.5. Suppose that there is a non-empty open set U ⊂ ML(Σ) with
µThu (∂U ) = 0 and for which the limit limL→∞ µL ,γ0 (U ) = αU exists and is
                               L
finite. Then the limit limL→∞ νγ0 = µ also exists and we have µ(U ) = αU .
Proof. Recall that by Proposition 4.1 every sequence Ln → ∞ contains a
                                Ln
subsequence (Lni )i such that (νγ0 i )i converges in the weak-*-topology to a
multiple α · µThu of the Thurston measure. By Lemma 4.2 we get that
                                      Ln
                                 lim µ,γ0i = α · µThu
                              i→∞
as well. Therefore
                                               Ln
                       α · µThu (U ) = lim µ,γ0i (U ) = αU
                                         i→∞
                                                                             37

meaning that the constant α does not depend on the particular convergent
           Ln
sequence (νγ0 i )i . The claim follows.                               

   Next we give a criterion ensuring the existence of a limit for the mea-
sures νγL0 in terms of the existence of densities of sets of simple multicurves
invariant under a certain semi-group. More precisely, if τ is train-track let

(4.10)                    Γτ = {φ ∈ Map(Σ)|φ(τ ) ≺ τ }

be the semi-group consisting of those mapping classes which map τ to a
train-track carried by τ .

Proposition 4.6. Let τ be a maximal recurrent train-track and U ⊂ {λ ∈
ML(Σ)|λ ≺ τ } open with µThu (U ) > 0 and µThu (∂U ) = 0. Suppose also
that the following holds:
         (*) If I ⊂ {γ ∈ MLZ (Σ)|γ ≺ τ } is a non-empty Γτ -invariant
         set of simple multicurves carried by τ then there is α > 0 with
                             1
                    lim            |I ∩ L · U | = α · µThu (U ).
                   L→∞ L6g−6+2r

Then the limit limL→∞ νγL0 exists.

   Before proving Proposition 4.6 let us comment on two of its features. On
the one hand, Proposition 4.6 has the virtue that it reduces the problem of
showing that the measures νγL0 converge to a problem about distribution of
simple multicurves. On the other hand, working with semigroups is harder
than working with groups. Also, even if we were to replace the semigroup
by the whole mapping class group, the statement would still not be at all
obvious – in fact, it would be the main result of [13].

Proof. Note first that, up to choosing a different hyperbolic metric on the
surface Σ, we can assume τ is -geodesic. In particular, we get from Propo-
sition 3.9 that if φ ∈ Γτ then
                              −1            −1
                            |π,γ0
                                   (γ)| ≤ |π,γ0
                                                 (φ(γ))|

for every simple multicurve γ ≺fills τ . It follows that the set
                                                 −1
                Is = {γ ∈ MLZ (Σ), γ ≺fills τ, |π,γ 0
                                                       (γ)| ≥ s}

is Γτ -invariant for all s. Note also that Proposition 3.9 asserts that there
is κ with Is = ∅ for all s > κ. Now, by assumption, for all s there is some
number αs with
                             1
                   lim            |Is ∩ L · U | = αs · µThu (U ).
                  L→∞ L6g−6+2r
38                         VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

Also, we can compute µL
                      ,γ0 (U ) as follows:

                                       1            X
                                                                  −1
                   µL
                    ,γ0 (U ) =                                 |π,γ  (γ)|
                                  L6g−6+2r                           0
                                             γ∈MLZ (Σ)∩L·U
                                       1                 X
                                                                           −1
                              ∼                                          |π,γ  (γ)|
                                  L6g−6+2r                                    0
                                             γ∈MLZ (Σ)∩L·U, γ ≺fills τ
                                             k
                                       1     X
                              =                    |Is ∩ L · U |.
                                  L6g−6+2r
                                             s=1

Here ∼ means that the difference between the quantities tends to 0 when L
grows – this is so because the set of multicurves carried by τ but which do
                                                               −1 (γ)| can only
not fill τ is negligible. The final equality holds because |π,γ 0
take the values 0, 1, . . . , κ.
  Combining the previous equations we get that µL     ,γ0 (U ) converges when
L → ∞ to the number
                      lim µL
                           ,γ0 (U ) = (α1 + α2 + · · · + ακ ) · µThu (U ).
                     L→∞

The claim now follows from Lemma 4.5.                                                             

     At this point we can prove:
Corollary 4.7. Let Σ be a hyperbolic surface of genus g with r cusps and
suppose that 2g + r > 3. Then we have:
      |{γ ∈ S|`Σ (γ) ≤ L, ι(γ, γ) = 1}|
     lim                                = 3(2g − 2 + r) · cΣ
 L→∞              L6g−6+2r
      |{γ ∈ S|`Σ (γ) ≤ L, ι(γ, γ) = 2}|   9                       
  lim               6g−6+2r
                                        = (2g + r)(2g + r − 3) + 2 · cΣ .
 L→∞              L                       2
where cΣ = µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|`Σ (λ) ≤ 1}).
   Before launching the proof of Corollary 4.7 note that all the results proved
in this section for the measures νγL0 and µL
                                           ,γ0 also apply to the measures

                      1       X                             1         X
                                                                                −1
           νkL =                     δ 1 γ and µL
                                                ,k =                         |π,k (γ)|δ 1 γ .
                   L6g−6+2r           L                 L6g−6+2r                          L
                              γ∈Sk                                  γ∈MLZ

The proofs are identical.

Proof. Let τ ⊂ Σ be a maximal recurrent train-track and O ⊂ ML(Σ) the
set of measured laminations carried by τ and let U = {λ ∈ O|`Σ (λ) ≤ 1}.
Finally, let V ⊂ MLZ (Σ) ∩ O be the set of all simple multicurves γ ≺ τ
carried by τ and traversing each edge of τ at least 10 times, that is ωγ (e) ≥ 10
for all e ∈ E(τ ). Note that V is generic in the set MLZ (Σ) ∩ O of simple
multicurves carried by τ . Genericity of V in MLZ (Σ) ∩ O, together with the
                                                                            39

universal bound given by Proposition 3.9 on the cardinality of the fibers of
π,k , implies that
                        1           X
                                                −1
                  lim 6g−6+2r                 |π,k (γ)| = 0
                 L→∞ L
                               γ∈(MLZ (Σ)∩L·U )\V

This means that if either one of the limits
                                         1          X
                                                             −1
             lim µL,k (U ) and lim    6g−6+2r
                                                           |π,k (γ)|
            L→∞                 L→∞ L
                                                 γ∈V∩L·U

exists then the other also exists, and when the limits exist, they agree.
  Consider the cases k = 1 and recall that by Lemma 3.10 we have
                         (π1 )−1 (γ) = 3(2g − 2 + r)
for all γ ∈ V. We thus have
               1       X
                              −1                           |V ∩ L · U |
        lim 6g−6+2r         |π,1 (γ)| = 3(2g − 2 + r) lim
       L→∞ L                                          L→∞ L6g−6+2r
                     γ∈V∩L·U

Using again that V is generic in U ∩ MLZ (Σ) we get that the latter limit
converges to the Thurston measure of U :
                                       |V ∩ L · U |
                         µThu (U ) = lim
                                    L→∞ L6g−6+2r
Altogether we have proved that
                   lim µL
                        ,1 (U ) = 3(2g − 2 + r) · µThu (U )
                   L→∞

Lemma 4.5 implies that that the measures µL   ,1 converge to a measure µ with
µ(U ) = 3(2g − 2 + r) · µThu (U ). Lemma 4.2 implies that µ = limL→∞ ν1L and
we get from Proposition 4.1 that µ is a multiple of the Thurston measure.
Since we know the measure of U we thus get that
                          µ = 3(2g − 2 + r) · µThu
The claim for k = 1 follows now from Proposition 4.3. Exactly the same
argument applies for k = 2.                                          

                                     5.
  In this section we prove Theorem 1.1. We start by recalling a few facts
about curves and train-tracks in the once punctured torus.
5.1. Train-tracks and simple curves in the punctured torus. Let
T = T1,1 be the once punctured torus and recall the following well-known
fact:
Fact 2. The inclusion map T1,1 → T1,0 from the once punctured torus T1,1
to the closed torus T1,0 induces a bijection between their respective sets of
oriented simple non-peripheral curves. Moreover, this bijection preserves
both the geometric and algebraic intersection number.
40                 VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

  It follows that choosing a basis for the homology H1 (T1,1 , Z) of the torus,
we can identify the set of simple multicurves in the once punctured torus
with the integral homology classes in the torus up to sign:
(5.1)                       MLZ (T1,1 ) = Z2 / ± 1
In fact, this identification extends to an identification between R2 / ± 1 and
the space of measured laminations on T1,1 :
(5.2)                       ML(T1,1 ) = R2 / ± 1
This last identification is compatible with the scaling by positive scalars in
R+ on the left and the right. Moreover, (5.1) and (5.2) are also compatible
under the identification
(5.3)                        Map(T1,1 ) = SL2 Z
between the mapping class group and SL2 Z, where the actions are on the
left by mapping classes and on the right by matrix multiplication.
   We describe next the maximal recurrent train-tracks in T . For every pair
of oriented simple essential curves α, β ⊂ T which intersect once, there is a
train-track τα,β which carries the curves α, β as well as the simple curve αβ
whose homology class is the sum of the classes of α and β (compare with
figure 9). Observe that
              τα,β = τ−α,−β = τβ,α = τ−β,−α but τα,β 6= τα,−β .
Moreover, with notation as in (5.2), we have
            {λ ∈ ML(T1,1 )|λ ≺ τα,β } = {xα + yβ|x, y ≥ 0}/ ± 1




        Figure 9. The train-track associated to two essential simple
        curves which intersect once.

   Note that τα,β is a maximal recurrent train-track. Conversely, it is well-
known that every maximal recurrent train-track τ on the torus T1,1 differs
from τα,β by a diffeomorphism. Moreover, since every orientation preserving
diffeomorphism φ : T1,1 → T1,1 with φ(τα,β ) = τα,β is either isotopic to Id or
to − Id we obtain that the mapping class of the homeomorphism mapping
τ to τα,β is unique up to composition by − Id. In other words we have:
                                                                          41

Fact 3. Let T be a once punctured torus and let α and β be oriented simple
curves intersecting once. If τ is a maximal recurrent train-track in T then
there is an orientation preserving homeomorphism φ : T → T with φ(τα,β ) =
τ . Moreover, the mapping class [φ] ∈ Map(T ) of f is uniquely determined
up to composition by − Id.
  Observe that the train-tracks ταβ,β and τα,αβ are carried by τα,β :
                              ταβ,β , τα,αβ ≺ τα,β .
Also, note that if (α, β) corresponds to a positively oriented basis of Z2
under (5.1), we have
                     δβ−1 (τα,β ) = ταβ,β , δα (τα,β ) = τα,αβ
where δβ and δα are the right Dehn-twist along β and α, respectively. We
obtain:
Fact 4. Let T be a once punctured torus and let α and β be oriented simple
curves with algebraic intersection number hα, βi = 1 and φ ∈ Map(T ). Then
we have
            Γτα,β = {φ ∈ Map(T1,1 )|φ(τα,β ) ≺ τα,β } = hδα , δβ−1 i+
where hδα , δβ−1 i+ is the semigroup generated by δα and δβ−1 .

   Still with the same notation, consider the identification π1 (T1,0 ) = Z2
with respect to which the two simple curves α and β correspond to the
standard basis:                           
                               1              0
                        α=          , β=          .
                               0              1
With respect to the induced identification (5.3) between the mapping class
group Map(T ) and the group SL2 Z we have that
                                                  
                           1 1                  1 0
                    δα =           , δβ =
                           0 1                 −1 1
which means that the semigroup generated by δα , δβ−1 corresponds to the
positive semigroup SL2 N ⊂ SL2 Z:
                                                                
                     −1                a b
      Γτα,β = hδα , δβ i+ = SL2 N =          ∈ SL2 Z a, b, c, d ≥ 0
                                       c d
5.2. Radallas and the map π in the punctured torus. Let τ = τα,β
be a maximal train-track in the punctured torus T1,1 . The train-track τ has
3 edges a, b, c labeled in such a way that
                                                           
                    1                 0                  ωγ (a)
         ωα =  0  and ωβ =  1  where ωγ =  ωγ (b)  .
                    1                 1                  ωγ (c)
Note that the complement T1,1 \ τ of this train-track is a punctured bigon,
but, after labelling the edges, has a structure reminiscent of a punctured
42                 VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

hexagon where opposite sides are identified in T1,1 . This means that τ can
be drawn as in figure 9 or as the boundary of an hexagon in the fundamental
domain of an hexagonal torus. See the left part of figure 10.
Remark. The only reason why we assumed that Σ was not a once punctured
torus in earlier sections was because we used the fact that the complemen-
tary regions of a maximal train-track could only be triangles and punctured
monogons. This additional “complication” in the case of the torus is in fact
not such a problem since we are instead in a very concrete setting.




       Figure 10. The left half is the train-track τ as the boundary
       of a hexagon – the picture is drawn in the universal homology
       cover of T1,1 , i.e. in R2 \ Z2 . The right image represents a
       possible radalla extending τ .

  Suppose that τ̂ is an arbitrary radalla extending τ . If γ ≺ τ̂ then the
coefficients ωγ (a), ωγ (b) and ωγ (c) satisfy
                           ωγ (c) ≥ ωγ (a) + ωγ (b)
with equality if and only if γ ≺ τ . Let
                       ρ(γ) = ωγ (c) − (ωγ (a) + ωγ (b))
denote the defect and define a map
                             πτ̂ : RE(τ̂ ) → RE(τ )
such that                                           
                                      ωγ (a) + ρ(γ)
                        πτ̂ (ωγ ) =  ωγ (b) + ρ(γ) 
                                      ωγ (c) + ρ(γ).
As in section 3.4, we can give a direct description of the map πτ̂ in terms of
the radalla, i.e. without giving formulas for the weights. To do so, we just
consider the image φ(τ̂ ) of the radalla in question and remove all punctured
monogons and all bigon and homotope what is left into τ (cf. with figure
11). Similarly, as long as we restrict to curves which are carried by some
-geodesic radalla, for  small enough, we can describe the map without
making use of any concrete carrying radalla. Instead we can define the map
only using the geodesic representative of the curve in question, just as we
                                                                            43




             Figure 11. The map πτ̂ at the level of radallas.

did in 3.4. Hence, as we did in the previous section, we get a well-defined
map
                          π : ST 1,1 ,k → MLZ (T1,1 )
which satisfies Lemma 3.8 and Proposition 3.9. Moreover, the arguments in
section 4 remain valid – in particular Proposition 4.3 and Proposition 4.6
still hold. We leave the details to the reader.
5.3. Proof of Theorem 1.1. Recall Theorem 1.3 stated in the introduc-
tion:
Theorem 1.3. Every SL2 N-invariant set I ⊂ N2 has a density, meaning
that there is α ∈ R with
                               1
                         lim 2 |I ∩ L · U | = α · vol(U )
                        L→∞ L
                 2
for any U ⊂ R open and bounded by a rectifiable Jordan curve. Here
L · U = {v ∈ R2 | L1 v ∈ U } is the set obtained by scaling U by L and vol(U )
is the area of U with respect to Lebesgue measure.
  Assuming Theorem 1.3 for now, we prove Theorem 1.1:
Theorem 1.1. Let Σ be a complete hyperbolic surface of finite volume home-
omorphic to a once punctured torus and let γ0 ⊂ Σ be a multicurve. The
limit (1.1) exists and moreover we have
         |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |`Σ (γ) ≤ L}|
     lim                         = Cγ0 · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|`Σ (λ) ≤ 1})
    L→∞             L2
where µThu is the Thurston measure on the space of measured laminations
ML(Σ) and Cγ0 > 0 depends only on γ0 .
Proof. We start by proving that the measures νγL0 defined in (4.6) converge.
By Proposition 4.6 it suffices to exhibit a maximal recurrent train-track
τ and an open set U ⊂ {λ ∈ ML(Σ)|λ ≺ τ } with µThu (U ) > 0 and
µThu (∂U ) = 0 and such that the following holds:
       (*) If I ⊂ {γ ∈ MLZ (Σ)|γ ≺ τ } is a non-empty Γτ -invariant
       set of simple multicurves carried by τ then there is α > 0
       with
                           1
                      lim 2 |I ∩ L · U | = α · µThu (U ),
                     L→∞ L
44                 VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

        where Γτ = {φ ∈ Map(Σ)|φ(τ ) ≺ τ }.
Let τ = τα,β be a standard maximal train-track in the once punctured
torus. As discussed earlier, identify the set of all simple multicurves carried
by τ with N2 and the semi-group Γτ with SL2 N in such a way that the
action of φ ∈ Γγ on curves carried by τ corresponds to the action by matrix
multiplication. In particular, we can identify the Γτ -invariant set I with an
SL2 N-invariant set I ⊂ N2 . Moreover, the identification {γ ∈ MLZ | γ ≺
τ } = N2 extends to an identification
                       {λ ∈ ML(T1,1 ) | λ ≺ τ } = R2+
in such a way that scaling by positive reals is preserved. It follows that for
                     U ⊂ {λ ∈ ML(T1,1 ) | λ ≺ τ } = R2+
open one has
                         1                1
                           |I ∩ L · U | = 2 |I ∩ L · U |
                        L2               L
where the left is computed in ML(T1,1 ) and the right is computed in R2 .
From Theorem 1.3 we get that, when working in R2 , the limit limL→∞ L12 |I ∩
L · U | exists and hence (*) holds. We have proved that the limit
                                νγ0 = lim νγL0
                                      L→∞
exists. Moreover, it follows from Proposition 4.1 that
                               νγ0 = Cγ0 · µThu
for some Cγ0 ∈ R+ . Applying Proposition 4.3 to the Liouville current λΣ
we get that
       |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λΣ , γ) ≤ L}|
     lim                          = Cγ0 · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λΣ , λ) ≤ 1}).
     L→∞           L2
The claim follows since ι(λΣ , ·) = `Σ (·).                                 
  In fact, using either the arguments in the proof of Theorem 1.1, or the
combination of Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 4.4, note that the claim of The-
orem 1.1 holds true in much more generality:
Corollary 5.1. Let Σ be a complete hyperbolic surface of finite volume and
homeomorphic to a once punctured torus and let γ0 ⊂ Σ be a multicurve.
The limit (1.3) exists and moreover we have
        |{γ ∈ Sγ0 |ι(λ0 , γ) ≤ L}|
     lim                           = Cγ0 · µThu ({λ ∈ ML(Σ)|ι(λ0 , λ) ≤ 1})
     L→∞            L2
for every filling current λ0 ∈ C(Σ).                                        
  It follows in particular that Theorem 1.1 also holds for instance if we
replace hyperbolic length by length with respect to a metric with pinched
negative curvature.
  It remains to prove Theorem 1.3 which we devote the next section to.
                                                                             45

5.4. Densities of SL2 N-invariant sets in N2 . The semigroup SL2 N is
the free semigroup generated by the two matrices
                                         
                             1 1       1 0
(5.4)                               ,          .
                             0 1       1 1
In this section we consider the action of SL2 N on N2 ⊂ (0, ∞)2 . Note that
this action is free. Note also that the inverses of the matrices in (5.4) are
the matrices                                   
                              1 −1         1 0
                                       ,            .
                              0 1          −1 1
                                                              
                   a        2                                a0
It follows that         ∈ N belongs to the SL2 N-orbit of          if and only
                   b                                         b0
                                                                         
                                                                          a
if while running the euclidean algorithm step by step beginning with
                                                                          b
                                                           
                   a0                                          1
one passes by           . In particular, the SL2 N-orbit of         is exactly
                   b0                                          1
the set of positive integer vectors whose entries are prime to each other:
                                                       
                          1          a       2
(5.5)           SL2 N          =          ∈ N gcd(a, b) = 1 .
                          1          b
It is well-known that this set has a density:
                             
                  1            1              6
(5.6)         lim 2 SL2 N          ∩ L · U = 2 vol(U ∩ (0, ∞)2 )
             L→∞ L             1              π
for every set U ⊂ R2 bounded by a rectifiable Jordan curve. Here vol stands
                                        2
for the standard volume in R2P   and π6 = ζ(2) is famously the value of the
                                   ∞
Riemann zeta function ζ(s) = n=1 n−s at s = 2.
   As a first step towards the proof of Theorem 1.3 we prove a generalization
of (5.6).
                                           
                                            p
Proposition 5.2. The set Sp,q = SL2 N           has a density for all p, q ∈ N.
                                            q
In fact,
                   1                    6
(5.7)           lim 2
                      |Sp,q ∩ L · U | = 2 vol(U ∩ (0, ∞)2 )
               L→∞ L                   π pq
for every set U ⊂ R2 bounded by a rectifiable Jordan curve. Moreover, we
have that
                                                   L2
                                          
                       x
                           ∈ Sp,q x + y ≤ L ≤
                       y                           2pq
for all L.
Proof. We deduce the existence of the density from a beautiful theorem of
Maucourant [11]. Consider SL2 N as a subset of the vector space M2,2 (R) of
2-by-2 real matrices and recall that SL2 N is exactly the intersection of SL2 Z
46                   VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

with the set of matrices in M2,2 (R) all of whose entries are non-negative.
For all L > 0, consider the measure
                                  1 X
                            νL = 2          δ1A
                                 L           L
                                            A∈SL2 N

on M2,2 (R) where δx is the Dirac probability measure centered at x. From
[11] we obtain that when L tends to ∞ the sequence of measures νL converges
to some measure ν on M2,2 (R). Although we will not need this fact, we
remark that the measure ν is given explicitly in [11, p. 361].
   Anyways, consider the map
                                                  
                                     2              p
                     P : M2,2 (R) → R , A 7→ A
                                                    q

and notice that for all U ⊂ R2 we have that
                             1
(5.8)                           |Sp,q ∩ L · U | = (P∗ νL )(U )
                             L2
where P∗ is the push-forward of the measure νL under P . It follows that
                             1
(5.9)                    lim    |Sp,q ∩ L · U | = (P∗ ν)(U )
                         L→∞ L2

for any open set U with (P∗ ν)(Ū \ U ) = 0. Moreover, from (5.8) and (5.9)
we get that P∗ ν(U ) is bounded from above by vol(U ). It follows that P∗ ν is
absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure and hence that
(5.9) holds for all sets bounded by rectifiable Jordan curves.
   Now, the measure P∗ ν is by construction invariant under the action of
SL2 N on (0, ∞)2 . More concretely, this means that for any A ∈ SL2 N and
U ⊂ (0, ∞)2 we have that P∗ ν(AU ) = P∗ ν(U ). Moreover, the measure P∗ ν
has the same scaling behavior as Lebesgue measure, meaning that for U as
above and L ∈ R+ one has P∗ ν(L·U ) = L2 ·P∗ ν(U ). Up to scaling, Lebesgue
measure is the only measure in the Lebesgue class with this behavior. Hence
there is a constant c with P∗ ν(·) = c · vol(·) and thus
                          1
                 lim          |Sp,q ∩ L · U | = c · vol(U ∩ (0, ∞)2 )
                L→∞ L2

for every U bounded by a rectifiable Jordan curve. To conclude the proof of
(5.7) we need to show that c = π26pq . To see this, let a, b > 0 and consider
the triangle
                                                        
                         x                         x
              ∆a,b =          ∈ (0, ∞)2 (a, b) ·         ≤1 .
                         y                         y
Note that                                                
                         p                              1
                 A                ∈ L · ∆1,1 ⇔ At               ∈ L · ∆p,q
                         q                              1
                                                                              47

where A ∈ SL2 N and At is the transpose of A. Since SL2 N is invariant
under taking transposes we deduce that
                                    
               p
(5.10)    A        ∈ L · ∆1,1 A ∈ SL2 N =
               q
                                                              
                                         1
                                       A     ∈ L · ∆p,q A ∈ SL2 N
                                         1
for all L > 0. From (5.5) and (5.6) we obtain that
                                         
          1        1                               6          1 6
     lim 2 A            ∈ L · ∆p,q A ∈ SL2 N = 2 vol(∆p,q ) =
    L→∞ L          1                              π           2 π 2 pq
and when combining this with (5.10) it follows that
                                             
           1         p                               6
       lim 2 A           ∈ L · ∆1,1 A ∈ SL2 N = 2 vol(∆1,1 )
      L→∞ L          q                              π pq
which proves that c = π26pq , as we wanted. We have established (5.7).
  The final claim in Proposition 5.2 follows from (5.10) together with the
                                                                     L2
observation that (L·∆p,q )∩N2 has at most cardinality vol(L·∆p,q ) = 2pq . 
  Armed with Proposition 5.2 we are ready to prove Theorem 1.3.
Proof of Theorem 1.3. Recall that the semigroup SL2 N acts freely on           2
                                                                          N.
                                                                            p
Moreover, because SL2 N is a free semigroup, two orbits Sp,q = SL2 N
                                                                            q
                   
                     r
and Sr,s = SL2 N          intersect if and only if one orbit is contained in the
                     s
other. It follows that any invariant set I can be written in a unique way as
the disjoint union of a set O of orbits
                                        G
                                I=          Sp,q
                                    (p,q)t ∈O

where the superscript t denotes, as always, the transpose. Note that the
infinite sum
                                  X      6
                            λ=           2
                                    t
                                        π pq
                                   (p,q) ∈O
exists because it is bounded from above by 1 and all its summands are
positive. We claim that for any U ⊂ (0, ∞)2 with rectifiable boundary we
have
                             1
                         lim 2 |I ∩ L · U | = λ vol(U ).
                        L→∞ L
Since the orbits Sp,q are pairwise disjoint, the claim follows directly from
Proposition 5.2 if the set O is finite. In particular, one has that
                                                      
                       1                    X      6 
(5.11)        lim inf 2 |I ∩ L · U | ≥            2
                                                         · vol(U )
               L→∞ L                              π pq
                                                0
                                          (p,q)∈O
48                    VIVEKA ERLANDSSON AND JUAN SOUTO

for any finite subset O0 ⊂ O. Note that for any  we can find a finite set O0
such that if P = O \ O0 is its complement we have
                                X     6
(5.12)                                2
                                          ≤ .
                                 t
                                     π pq
                                    (p,q) ∈P

The claim will follow then from (5.11) if we show that for any U ⊂ (0, 1)2
as above and set P ⊂ O satisfying (5.12) we have
                                        
                        1      G
                lim sup 2          Sp,q  ∩ L · U ≤ cU · 
                  L→∞ L         t   (p,q) ∈P

for some constant cU depending on U . In fact, letting `U be such that
U ⊂ `U · ∆1,1 we will prove that cU = `2U does the trick – here ∆1,1 is as in
the proof of Proposition 5.2. For any such U we get that
                                          
       G                           G
            Sp,q  ∩ L · U ≤          Sp,q  ∩ L · `U · ∆1,1
      (p,q)t ∈P                        (p,q)t ∈P
                                                     
                                                                        
                                          G              x
                                =                 Sp,q  ∩    x + y ≤ L`U
                                                          y
                                      (p,q)t ∈P
                                                                    
                                      X                x
                                =             Sp,q ∩       x + y ≤ L`U
                                       t
                                                       y
                                    (p,q) ∈P
                                      X         L2 `2U             X           6
                                ≤                      < L2 cU                        ≤ L2 cU 
                                                 2pq                         π 2 pq
                                    (p,q)t ∈P                    (p,q)t ∈P

Having established the bound we needed, we have proved Theorem 1.3.                               
   The reader might wonder if one really needed to say anything justifying
that the density of a disjoint union of set is the sum of the densities of the
individual sets. Well, this statement is in fact not true in general: in general
every countable set is the countable union of singletons, which obviously
have density 0. In other words, the last claim of Proposition 5.2 actually
plays a central role in the proof of Theorem 1.3.

                                     References
 [1] J. Aramayona and C. Leininger, Hyperbolic structures on surfaces and geodesic cur-
     rents, to appear in Algorithms and geometric topics around automorphisms of free
     groups, Advanced Courses CRM-Barcelona, Birkhäuser.
 [2] F. Bonahon, Bouts des variétés hyperboliques de dimension 3, Ann. of Math. 124
     (1986).
 [3] F. Bonahon, The geometry of Teichmüller space via geodesic currents, Invent. Math.
     92 (1988).
 [4] F. Bonahon, Geodesic currents on negatively curved groups, in Arboreal group theory
     MSRI Publ., 19, Springer, 1991.
                                                                                          49

 [5] A. Casson and S. Bleiler, Automorphisms of surfaces after Nielsen and Thurston,
     Cambridge University Press, 1988.
 [6] M. Duchin, C. Leininger and K. Rafi, Length spectra and degeneration of flat metrics,
     Invent. Math. 182, (2010).
 [7] A. Fathi, F. Laudenbach and V. Póenaru, Travaux de Thurston sur les surfaces,
     Astérisque, vol. 66-67, 1979.
 [8] U. Hamenstädt, Parametrizations of Teichmüller space and its Thurston boundary,
     in Geometric analysis and nonlinear partial differential equations, J. Geom. Anal. 14
     (2004).
 [9] A. Hatcher, Measured lamination spaces for surfaces, from the topological viewpoint,
     Topology and its Applications 30, (1988).
[10] H. Masur, Ergodic actions of the mapping class group, Proc. AMS 94, (1985).
[11] F.Maucourant, Homogeneous asymptotic limits of Haar measures of semisimple linear
     groups and their lattices, Duke Math. J. 136, (2007).
[12] G. McShane and I. Rivin, A Norm on Homology of Surfaces and Counting Simple
     Geodesics, IMRN 2, (1995).
[13] M. Mirzakhani, Growth of the number of simple closed geodesics on hyperbolic sur-
     faces, Annals of Math. 168, (2008).
[14] M. Mirzakhani, Counting mapping class group orbits on hyperbolic surfaces.
[15] J.-P. Otal, Le spectre marqué des longueurs des surfaces à courbure négative, Ann. of
     Math. 131, (1990).
[16] A. Papadopoulos, Reseaux ferroviaires, difféomorphismes pseudo-Anosov eu auto-
     morphismes symplectiques de l’homologie d’une surface, Publications Mathematiques
     d’Orsay, 1983.
[17] R. Penner and J. Harer, Combinatorics of Train Tracks, Princeton University Press,
     1992.
[18] M. Rees, An alternative approach to the ergodic theory of measured foliations on
     surfaces, Ergodic Theory Dynamical Systems 1, (1982).
[19] I. Rivin, Geodesics with one self-intersection, and other stories, Adv. Math. 231,
     (2012).
[20] J. Sapir, Lower bound for the number of non-simple geodesics on surfaces,
     arXiv:1505.06805.
[21] J. Sapir, Bounds on the number of non-simple closed geodesics on a surface,
     arXiv:1505.07171
[22] W. Thurston, The Geometry and Topology of Three-manifolds, Unpublished notes,
     1980.

   Aalto Science Institute, Aalto University
   E-mail address: viveca.erlandsson@aalto.fi

   IRMAR, Université de Rennes 1
   E-mail address: juan.souto@univ-rennes1.fr
