                                                           ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS

                                             LUCY KOCH-HYDE, SIOBHÁN O’CONNOR, ÉAMONN OLIVE, AND VLADIMIR SHPILRAIN

                                                 Abstract. By strengthening known results about primitivity-blocking words in free groups,
                                                 we prove that for any element w of a free group of finite rank, there are words that cannot
                                                 be subwords of any cyclically reduced automorphic image of w. This has implications for
                                                 the average-case complexity of a variant of Whitehead’s problem.
arXiv:2505.00477v2 [math.GR] 8 Aug 2025




                                                                                   1. Introduction
                                             Let Fr be a free group with a free generating set (i.e. basis) x1 , . . . , xr . Call an element
                                          u ∈ Fr primitive if there is an automorphism of Fr that takes x1 to u.
                                             For a given element w ∈ Fr , we say a word v is w-orbit-blocking (or just orbit-blocking
                                          if w is clear from the context) if for any automorphism φ ∈ Aut(Fr ), the word v is not a
                                          subword of the cyclic reduction of φ(w).
                                             Primitivity-blocking words are the same as x1 -orbit-blocking. The existence of primitivity-
                                          blocking words easily follows from Whitehead’s observation that the Whitehead graph of
                                          any cyclically reduced primitive element is either disconnected or has a cut vertex. More
                                          about this in Section 2.
                                             We first show that primitivity-blocking words cannot appear as subwords of some wider
                                          classes of primitive elements that are not necessarily cyclically reduced; see Lemma 3.2,
                                          Lemma 3.5, and Theorem 3.7.
                                             We give new examples of primitivity-blocking words and an algorithm for detecting primitivity-
                                          blocking words in F2 (Theorem 5.5). Algorithmically detecting primitivity-blocking words
                                          in Fr where r > 2 remains an open problem.
                                             Based on Lemma 3.2, we show in Section 6 that for any w ∈ Fr , there are w-orbit-blocking
                                          words (in fact, depending only on the length of w), thus giving a complete solution of Problem
                                          (F40) from [3]. Previously [8], we gave a solution in the special case r = 2 based on a very
                                          special and explicit description of bases in F2 from [5].
                                             In Section 7, we apply our main result to show that the average-case time complexity of
                                          the following variant of Whitehead’s problem is constant with respect to n: given a fixed
                                          u ∈ Fr , decide, on an input v ∈ Fr of length n, whether or not v is an automorphic image of
                                          u.

                                                                                    2. Background
                                            The Whitehead graph Wh(w) of w ∈ Fr has 2r vertices that correspond to the generators
                                          and their inverses. For each occurrence of a subword xi xj in the word w ∈ Fr , there is an
                                          edge in Wh(w) that connects the vertex xi to the vertex x−1                               −1
                                                                                                        j ; if w has a subword xi xj ,
                                          then there is an edge connecting xi to xj , etc. There is one more edge (the external edge):
                                          this is the edge that connects the vertex corresponding to the last letter of w to the vertex
                                          corresponding to the inverse of the first letter.
                                                                                             1
2                            ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS

   It was observed by Whitehead himself in his cut vertex lemma (see [16]) that the Whitehead
graph of any cyclically reduced primitive element w is either disconnected or has a cut vertex,
i.e. a vertex that, having been removed from the graph together with all incident edges,
increases the number of connected components of the graph. A short and elementary proof
of this result was recently given in [7], and a more general case of primitive elements in
subgroups of Fr was recently treated in [1].
   Thus, for example, if the Whitehead graph of w (without the external edge) is complete
(i.e., any two vertices are connected by at least one edge), then w is primitivity-blocking
because in this case, if w is a subword of u, then the Whitehead graph of u, too, is complete
and therefore is connected and does not have a cut vertex. Here are some examples of
primitivity-blocking words: xn1 xn2 · · · xnr x1 (for any n ≥ 2), [x1 , x2 ][x3 , x4 ] · · · [xn−1 , xn ]x−1
                                                                                                          1
(for an even n), etc. Here [x, y] denotes x−1 y −1 xy.
   Primitivity blocking was used for the first time in [2] to show that for any k, there is
w ∈ Fr that is not a product of ≤ k primitive elements.
   In [8], we showed that for any w ∈ F2 , there are w-orbit-blocking words. This was based
on an explicit description of bases (equivalently, of automorphisms) of F2 from [5].

                                     3. Blocking primitivity
Definition 3.1. Call a basis of Fr strongly reduced if there is no element g ∈ Fr such that
conjugating each element of the basis by g decreases the sum of the lengths of the basis
elements.
   Note that every basis of Fr has a strongly reduced basis in its conjugacy class. Since there
is a one-to-one correspondence between bases and automorphisms of Fr , we will also refer
to strongly reduced automorphisms as those corresponding to strongly reduced bases.
   Then we have the following technical result of independent interest.
Lemma 3.2. Let B be a strongly reduced basis of Fr . No primitivity-blocking word appears
as a subword of any element in B.
Proof. Fix u in B. We will show it does not contain a primitivity-blocking subword. If u
is cyclically reduced, then it cannot contain a primitivity-blocking subword by definition.
Suppose now that u is not cyclically reduced.
   Let p be the first letter appearing in u. Since u is not cyclically reduced, p−1 is the last
letter appearing in u. Now consider two cases:
1. Every element of the basis B either starts with p or ends with p−1 (or both). In this
case, conjugating every element of B by p (i.e. taking every z ∈ B to p−1 zp) will decrease
the total length of elements of B, contradicting the fact that B is strongly reduced.
2. There is an element v ∈ B that neither starts with p nor ends with p−1 . Then consider
the element w = uv. Since v has neither left nor right cancellation with u, this w is cyclically
reduced. Furthermore, since both u and v belong to the same basis of Fr , w must be primitive
in Fr . Since w is primitive and cyclically reduced, it, and thus u as well, cannot contain a
primitivity-blocking subword.                                                                 □

  Even though Lemma 3.2 suffices to prove our main result (Theorem 6.1 in Section 6), we
believe the following generalization might be useful, too.
                          ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS                                   3

Definition 3.3. We call a basis B weakly reduced if there is no letter p such that every
element of B begins with p and ends with p−1 .
  First we need the following
Lemma 3.4. Suppose w, v ∈ Fr such that w and v are not powers of the same element. Let
u(m) = wm vw−m . Then there exists m ≥ 0 such that the following are true:
   (1) The first letters of u(m) and w are the same.
   (2) The last letters of u(m) and w−1 are the same.
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that for all m, w or w−1 completely cancels in
u(m + 1) = wu(m)w−1 . It follows that |u(m + 1)| ≤ 2|w| + |u(m)| − 2|w| = |u(m)|. Since
the sequence |u(i)|∞i=0 is non-increasing and bounded below, there must be some k such that
for all i ≥ k, |u(i)| = |u(i + 1)|. That is, the sequence must eventually become constant.
Thus, {u(i)}∞i=0 must eventually form a cycle of equal length words. Since conjugation is a
one-to-one map, the entire sequence must be a cycle, and so u(0) = v must be a member of
the cycle. Therefore, each conjugation rotates v by m letters. Thus, w and v are powers of
the same element, a contradiction with the condition of the lemma.                       □
Lemma 3.5. Let B be a weakly reduced basis of Fr , where r ≥ 3, and let w ∈ B. Then w
does not contain any primitivity-blocking subwords.
Proof. If w is cyclically reduced then it does not contain a primitivity-blocking subword.
Thus, assume that w begins with p and ends with p−1 .
   Since B is weakly reduced, there exists u ∈ B such that it either does not begin with p or
it does not end with p−1 . We will assume, without loss of generality, that u does not begin
with p. Let v ∈ B be an element such that v ̸= w and v ̸= u. Take the word z = um vu−m
with m given by Lemma 3.4. The word wz is a primitive cyclically reduced word containing
w.                                                                                         □
  Note that in F2 , a weakly reduced basis can contain a primitivity-blocking word. For
instance, the basis {aba−1 , ba−1 } is weakly reduced, but contains aba−1 , which is primitivity-
blocking in F2 .
  Lemma 3.5 can be generalized further, as follows.
Definition 3.6. We say that a basis B is partially reduced if there exists a proper subset
X of B such that there are non-trivial words w, v ∈ ⟨X⟩ that do not begin with the same
letter.
Theorem 3.7. Let B be a partially reduced basis of Fr , where r ≥ 3, and let u ∈ B. Then
u does not contain a primitivity-blocking subword.
Proof. If B is weakly reduced, then we are done. Thus we will proceed under the assumption
that B is not weakly reduced, and let u ∈ B start with a letter p and end with p−1 . We are
going to construct a new basis B ′ ∋ u that is weakly reduced.
  Since B is not weakly reduced, each basis element of B begins with p and ends with p−1 .
We will assume, without loss of generality, that B \ X contains just one element, call it β.
Let w ∈ ⟨X⟩ be a word beginning with a letter q ̸= p. We will consider two cases:
Case 1. β = u.
Then for each γ ∈ X, let mγ be the value given by Lemma 3.4 such that wmγ γw−mγ begins
with q and ends with q −1 . Let m be the maximum of such numbers mγ . In this case, we
4                          ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS

construct the basis B ′ = wm Xw−m ∪ {u}. We can verify this is a basis by conjugating B by
wm to get wm Bw−m and then applying the automorphism which maps u to w−m uwm and
maps X to itself. Then B ′ is a weakly reduced basis containing u.
Case 2. β ̸= u.
In this case we construct the basis B ′ = X ∪ {w|β|+1 β}. Then B ′ is a weakly reduced basis
containing u.                                                                             □
    Lemma 3.2 can also be generalized in a different direction.
Definition 3.8. We call a word w slender if there exists a generator x1 such that the number
of letters in w equal to x1 or x−1
                                1 is 1 or 0.

Theorem 3.9. Let φ be a strongly reduced automorphism of Fr , where r ≥ 3. Let w be a
slender word. Then φ(w) does not contain a primitivity-blocking subword.
Proof. Assume first that some x = xi appears in w exactly once. If φ(w) is cyclically
reduced, then φ(w) is a cyclically reduced primitive word, and thus it cannot contain a
primitivity-blocking subword.
   Suppose now that φ(w) is not cyclically reduced. Let p be the first letter of φ(w)
(and thereby p−1 is the last letter of φ(w)). Let B be the basis associated with φ, i.e.
{φ(xj ) : j = 1, 2, . . . , r}. If there is some element φ(y) ∈ B not equal to φ(x) which nei-
ther begins with p nor ends with p−1 , then φ(w)φ(y) is a cyclically reduced primitive word.
Otherwise, since r ≥ 3 and φ is strongly reduced, there exists φ(z) ∈ (B \ φ(x))±1 that
does not begin with p. Then let φ(s) be a basis element not equal to φ(z) or φ(x), and let
u = φ(w)φ(z)m φ(s)φ(z)−m , where m is the value given by Lemma 3.4. Then u is a cyclically
reduced primitive word containing φ(w), so φ(w) is not primitivity-blocking.
   Now suppose that for some x = xi , there is no letter x or x−1 in w. Select y from the set
of generators and their inverses such that y ̸= x±1 and there is no cancellation in φ(y)φ(w).
Since φ is strongly reduced and r ≥ 3, such a y exists. Let m be the value given by Lemma
3.4 such that φ(y)−m xφ(y)m has the same last letter as φ(y). Then let v = y −m xy m w. v
contains x exactly once and does not contain its inverse. Thus by the argument above, φ(v)
is not primitivity-blocking, so there is a cyclically reduced primitive word containing φ(v),
and therefore also φ(w). Therefore, φ(w) is not primitivity-blocking.                       □
  Just as we will use Lemma 3.2 to produce orbit-blocking words in Theorem 6.1, we will
use Theorem 3.9 to establish Theorem 7.3.

                4. On the structure of primitivity-blocking words
  To show that blocking primitivity does not have to be due to connectivity properties of
the Whitehead graph, we include the following examples.
Proposition 4.1. (a) In the group F2 , the words xk1 xk2 are primitivity-blocking for any k ≥ 2.
(b) In the group Fr , r ≥ 3, the words xk1 . . . xkr are not primitivity-blocking for any k ≥ 1.
Proof. (a) Theorem 5.2 says that in a cyclically reduced primitive word in F2 , at least one
of the generators either only appears with the exponent 1 throughout or the exponent −1
throughout. Thus, xk1 xk2 cannot be a subword of a cyclically reduced primitive element if
k ≥ 2.
                           ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS                                      5

(b) Let r ≥ 3. The word u = xkr x2 is obviously primitive in Fr for any k ≥ 1. Applying to
u the automorphisms xr 7→ xki xr x−k
                                  i , xj 7→ xj if j ̸= r, for i = 1, . . . , r − 1 in order gives the
element
                                   xk1 . . . xkr x−k         −k
                                                  r−1 . . . x1 x2 ,
which is a cyclically reduced primitive word containing xk1 . . . xkr as a subword.                □
  Part (b) of Proposition 4.1 can be generalized as follows:
Proposition 4.2. Let Fr where r ≥ 3 be generated by the set X ⊔Y . Let ⟨X⟩ and ⟨Y ⟩ denote
the subgroups of Fr generated by X and Y , respectively. Let w = wX wY , where wX ∈ ⟨X⟩,
wY ∈ ⟨Y ⟩. Then w is not a primitivity-blocking word.
Proof. Since r ≥ 3, we can also assume, without loss of generality, that |Y | ≥ 2.
  Now select y ∈ Y such that there is no cancellation in wY y or in ywY−1 . Consider the word
v = wY−1 wX wY y. This word is cyclically reduced and contains w as a subword. To show that
v is primitive we apply the automorphism that conjugates all generators in X by wY and
acts as the identity on Y . Since Y and X are disjoint, this is indeed an automorphism.
  Applying this automorphism to v gives v ′ = wX y. Since v ′ contains the letter y exactly
once, it is primitive, and therefore so is v. Thus, w is not primitivity-blocking.         □
 We note that the shortest primitivity-blocking word in F2 is x−1   1 x2 x1 . Note that the
Whitehead graph (with or without the external edge) of this word does have a cut vertex.
 It is natural then to look for the shortest primitivity-blocking words in Fr for r > 2.
Theorem 4.3. The word w = x1 x2 x3 . . . xr−1 x2r xr−1 . . . x3 x2 x−1
                                                                    1 ∈ Fr is the shortest primitivity-
blocking word for r > 2.
Proof. First we will show that there can be no shorter primitivity-blocking words. For a
word u of length < 2r there is an xk which appears (positively or negatively) one or fewer
times in u. If xk appears zero times then the word uxk is primitive, cyclically reduced and
contains u. If xk appears only once, then u is primitive, and if u is cyclically reduced, then
u cannot be primitivity-blocking. If u is not cyclically reduced, then let y be a letter such
that y ̸= x±1 and y is not the letter the begins or ends u, then uy is cyclically reduced and
primitive, and so u is not primitivity-blocking.
  Now we will show that w is primitivity-blocking. Assume by way of contradiction that
v is a cyclically reduced primitive word which contains w as a subword. Assume further
that no shorter cyclically reduced primitive word contains w (i.e. v is minimal). Since w is
not cyclically reduced, it must be a proper subword of v. We remark that the Whitehead
graph of w (Figure 4.4) consists of a single cycle of all the vertices other than x−1 1 . The
Whitehead graph of v must contain Wh(w) as a subgraph. Since w begins with x1 and


          Figure 4.4. The Whitehead graph of x1 x2 x3 . . . xr−1 x2r xr−1 . . . x3 x2 x−1
                                                                                       1

                                 x1    x12   x23   x34   xr−1   xr

                                                   ···

                                x−1
                                 1  x−1
                                     2
                                     1  x−1
                                         3
                                         2  x−1
                                             4
                                             3  x−1   −1
                                                 r−1 xr
6                           ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS

ends with x−1
            1 , there must be an edge in Wh(v) from x1
                                                           −1
                                                              to some other vertex. If there
is more than one such edge, then Wh(v) is connected and has no cut vertices. Since we
assumed v was a cyclically reduced primitive word, this contradicts the cut vertex lemma.
So, Wh(v) has exactly one such edge. We will call the other vertex in this edge y. Applying
the automorphism φ = x1 7→ y −1 x1 then cancels a y or y −1 respectively for each x1 or x1 that
appears, thus reducing the total length of v. Furthermore, φ(w) = y −1 wy, of which only the
y −1 and y cancel in φ(v). Thus w is a subword of φ(v), contradicting our assumption that
v was minimal.                                                                               □

    The details of the above proof are heavily inspired by the proof of Theorem 3.7 in [1].
Remark 4.5. The word w = x1 x22 x23 . . . x2r x−1
                                               1 is also a primitivity-blocking word of the same
length as the one in Theorem 4.3. Since it has a Whitehead graph consisting of a cycle of all
vertices other than x−1                                      −1
                     1 , begins with x1 , and ends with x1 , the proof of Theorem 4.3 applies
without adjustment to this word as well.
Remark 4.6. A similar word w = x1 x2 . . . xr−1 x2r xr−1 . . . x2 x1 is not primitivity-blocking in
any Fr , r ≥ 2. Indeed, for r = 2, w is a subword of x2 x1 x22 x1 , which is a cyclically reduced
primitive word.
  For r > 2, let u = x2 x3 . . . xr−1 x2r xr−1 . . . x3 x2 . We will now consider the word v =
ux1 ux1 x3 . This v clearly contains w as a subword and is cyclically reduced. Apply the
automorphism φ = x1 7→ u−1 x1 , xi 7→ xi , i ≥ 2. Then φ(v) = x21 x3 is a primitive element,
and therefore so is v.

                        5. Detecting primitivity-blocking words
    In light of the results above, it is natural to ask:
Problem 5.1. Is there an algorithm that, for a given word u ∈ Fr , would decide whether or
not u is primitivity-blocking?
  Below, we give a solution for the case r = 2. First we will need the following fact about
the structure of bases in F2 that builds on a result of [5]. For details about this version of
the statement, see Lemma 1 of [8].
Theorem 5.2 ([5, p. 1]). Up to switching a with b or a with a−1 , or conjugating u and v by
the same word, every basis (u, v) of F (a, b) is of the form
                                      u = abm1 . . . abmp
                                      v = (br1 abn1 . . . abnq abr2 )ε
where ε = ±1 and {m1 , . . . , mp } = {r1 + r2 , n1 , . . . , nq } = {t, t + 1} for some fixed integer t.
  We will need two more tools that further build on this fact before we can describe our
algorithm.
Lemma 5.3. Let w be a positive word in F2 whose first syllable is bn . Let q be the largest
exponent appearing on b in w. If n < q, then w is primitivity-blocking if and only if b−n w
is. If n = q then w is primitivity-blocking if and only if aw is. Analogous statements hold if
bn is the last syllable.
                          ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS                                 7

Proof. We will argue assuming that bn is the first syllable.
   Suppose that b−n w is primitivity-blocking. Then, since b−n w is a subword of w, w is
primitivity-blocking. Similarly, if w is primitivity-blocking, then so is aw.
   Now suppose that n < q and w′ = b−n w is not primitivity-blocking. Then there exists
v such that vw′ is cyclically reduced and primitive with no cancellation between v and w′ .
This w′ starts with a by our hypothesis. Theorem 5.2 then implies that the last syllable
of v is bk where k ≥ q − 1. Since n ≤ q − 1, w is a subword of vw′ and is therefore not
primitivity-blocking.
   Finally, suppose that n = q and w is not primitivity-blocking. Then there exists v such
that vw is cyclically reduced and primitive with no cancellation between v and w. If the last
syllable of w is bk for some k < q, then by the argument above we may consider ŵ = wb−k
instead. Thus assume without loss of generality that w ends with a or bq . Suppose somewhere
in w b appears to a smaller exponent than q. Then Theorem 5.2 implies that v ends with a,
so aw is a subword of vw and is therefore not primitivity-blocking. Suppose every exponent
on b in w is q. If every exponent on a in w is 1, then either w ends in bq so awb is primitive,
or w ends in a, so awbq+1 is primitive. Otherwise, by Theorem 5.2, every exponent on b in
vw must be 1, so v must end in a and we have that aw is not primitivity-blocking.            □
Lemma 5.4. Suppose u ∈ F2 is of the form abm1 . . . abmp , where each mi is in {t, t + 1}
where t ≥ 0. Denote the automorphism a 7→ ab−t by φ. Then u is primitivity-blocking if and
only if φ(u) is.
Proof. Suppose u is not primitivity-blocking. We will show that φ(u) is not primitivity-
blocking either. Suppose uv is a cyclically reduced primitive word such that there is no
cancellation between u and v. Then φ(uv) is primitive. Since u is positive, v must also be
positive by Theorem 5.2. Thus, φ(v) cannot end in a−1 . So, since φ(u) starts with a, φ(uv)
is cyclically reduced. Furthermore, since mp ≥ t, there is no cancellation between φ(u) and
φ(v), so φ(u) is a subword of φ(uv) and we have that φ(u) is not primitivity-blocking.
   We must also show that if φ(u) is not primitivity-blocking, neither is u. Let φ(u)v
be primitive and cyclically reduced such that there is no cancellation between u and v.
φ−1 (φ(u)v) = uφ−1 (v) is then primitive. If φ(u) ̸= ap , then v must be a positive word
by Theorem 5.2. If φ(u) = ap , assume without loss of generality that v = b. φ−1 sends a
to abt , so since a−1 does not appear in φ(u)v, we have that uφ−1 (v) is cyclically reduced.
Furthermore, φ(u) ends in a or ab and the first letter in v must be either a or b, so there
is no cancellation between u and φ−1 (v). It follows that all of u appears as a subword of
uφ−1 (v), so it cannot be primitivity-blocking.                                           □
Theorem 5.5. There is an algorithm that decides, for a given word u ∈ F2 of length n,
whether or not u is primitivity-blocking and has the worst-case time complexity O(n2 ).
Proof. Call our algorithm A and let F2 have generators a and b. After each step we will
replace u by the result of that step and still call it u.
Step 1. A checks whether there is a generator that either only appears with the exponent 1
        throughout or the exponent −1 throughout. If not, then Theorem 5.2 implies that
        u is primitivity-blocking, so we stop. Otherwise A swaps a with b and/or swaps a
        with a−1 if necessary so that a only appears with the exponent 1 in u.
Step 2. A checks whether all the exponents on b in u have the same sign. If not, then
        Theorem 5.2 implies that u is primitivity-blocking, so we stop. Otherwise A swaps
        b with b−1 if necessary to make all the exponents on b positive.
8                         ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS

Step 3. A checks whether there exists an integer t such that every exponent on b in u belongs
         to {t, t + 1} except for any times b appears before the first occurrence of a or after
         the last one. (If b always appears to the same exponent, take that exponent to be
         t + 1.) If not, then u is primitivity-blocking by Theorem 5.2.
Step 4. A checks whether there is an exponent on b appearing before the first a or after the
         last a, that is greater than t + 1. If so, then u is primitivity-blocking by Theorem
         5.2.
Step 5. Suppose bk is the power of b appearing before the first a. Then A checks whether k is
         the largest exponent on b appearing in u. If it is, then A replaces u by au. Otherwise
         it replaces u by b−k u. This does not change the primitivity-blocking property by
         Lemma 5.3. Again using Lemma 5.3, if the exponent on b appearing after the last
         a is less than t (including if it is 0), then A changes that exponent to t. Note that
         at the end of this step, our word is of the form abm1 . . . abmp , where each mi is in
         {t, t + 1}.
Step 6. A applies the automorphism a 7→ ab−t to the word u obtained as a result of Step 5.
         By Lemma 5.4, this does not change whether or not u is primitivity-blocking.
Step 7. A swaps a with b and checks whether the word u has two or fewer syllables. If it does,
         then it is of the form bm or bm a for some non-negative m. These are both subwords of
         bm a, which is a cyclically reduced primitive word, so neither are primitivity-blocking
         and thus A stops and returns that u is not primitivity-blocking. If the word u has
         more than two syllables, then A goes to Step 3.
   Now we note that Step 5 of the algorithm A adds at most t + 1 to the length of the word
and Step 6 adds exactly −pt to the length of the word. Thus, as long as p is greater than
1, repeating steps 3 through 7 decreases the length of the word. If p = 0, the word must
be either a or the empty word after Step 5, and either way the algorithm will stop at Step
7. If p = 1, then after Step 5, u is of the form abmp , so at Step 7, u will have two or fewer
syllables, so the algorithm will stop. Thus, A always terminates. Furthermore, it follows
that each step takes at most linear time in n (the length of the input word), and the number
of repetitions of steps 3 through 7 is also bounded by n, so the worst-case time complexity
of A is O(n2 ).                                                                               □

                            6. Blocking automorphic orbits
    Now we establish the main result of the paper.
Theorem 6.1. Let w ∈ Fr have cyclically reduced length ℓ. Let {vi }ℓ+1  i=1 be a sequence of
primitivity-blocking words such that thereQis no cancellation between adjacent terms of the
sequence, nor between vℓ+1 and v1 . Then ℓ+1i=1 vi is w-orbit-blocking.

Proof. Let φ be an automorphism of Fr . Let φ̄ be a strongly reduced automorphism of the
form γ ◦ φ where γ is conjugation by some element of Fr . Suppose w = a1 . . . aℓ , where
each ai is a letter. Then each φ̄(aj ) does not contain any vi by Lemma 3.2. Thus if some vi
appears in φ̄(w), it cannot be contained entirely within any single φ̄(aj ) and thus must be
contained partially in one and partially in an adjacent one.
   Consider φ̄(w) as a cyclic word. Since there are ℓ pairs of adjacent images of letters under
φ̄, there are at most ℓ non-intersecting words vi in φ̄(w).
   Note that φ(w) and φ̄(w) may differ, but they are in the same conjugacy class, so the cyclic
reduction of φ(w) also contains at most ℓ non-intersecting subwords belonging to {vi }ℓ+1   i=1 .
                           ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS                                     9

Therefore, no cyclically reduced element in the orbit of w can contain the product of all ℓ + 1
words vi .                                                                                   □
  A sequence of primitivity-blocking words mentioned in the statement of Theorem 6.1 can
be built as follows. Take a particular primitivity-blocking word, e.g. u = x21 x22 · · · x2r x1 (see
Section 2). Let vi = u for all i = 1, . . . , k + 1. This sequence of vi satisfies all conditions of
Theorem 6.1.

             7. Average-case complexity of the Whitehead problem
   Here we address the computational complexity of the following version of the Whitehead
problem on automorphic equivalence in Fr : given a fixed u ∈ Fr , decide, on an input v ∈ Fr
of length n, whether or not v is an automorphic image of u. We show that the average-case
complexity of this version of the Whitehead problem is constant if the input v is a cyclically
reduced word. For a formal definition of the average-case complexity of an algorithm in the
context of group theory we refer the reader to [9].
   This version is a special case of the general Whitehead problem [15] that asks, given two
elements u, v ∈ Fr , whether or not u can be taken to v by an automorphism of Fr . The
worst-case complexity of the Whitehead problem is unknown in general (cf. [3, Problem
(F25)]) but is at most quadratic in max(|u|, |v|) if r = 2, see [13] and [11].
   The version of the Whitehead problem that we consider here is different in that the input
consists of just one element v, and the complexity of an algorithm that solves the problem
is a function of the length of v, while the length of u is considered constant.
   To construct an algorithm with constant average-case complexity, we use the same ap-
proach that we used in [8] in the special case where the rank of the ambient free group is
2.
   Our algorithm will be a combination of two different algorithms running in parallel: one
is fast but may be inconclusive, whereas the other one is conclusive but relatively slow. This
idea has been used for group theoretic algorithms since at least [9].
   Before running the two algorithms, a pre-computation would be performed on u. The
algorithm would reduce the length of the fixed word u by the process of “Whitehead min-
imization”. The minimization process successively applies elementary Whitehead automor-
phisms to the word that reduce its length until its length cannot be reduced any further.
This process takes worst-case quadratic time in |u|. However, since u is a fixed word, this
amounts to constant time for the algorithm. Denote the obtained element of minimum length
in the orbit of u by ū. Once the word has been minimized, the two algorithms will be run
in parallel on the result.
   A fast algorithm T would detect a ū-orbit-blocking subword B(ū) of a (cyclically reduced)
input word v, as follows. Let n be the length of v. The algorithm T would read the initial
segments of v of length k, k = 1, 2, . . . , adding one letter at a time, and check if this initial
segment has B(ū) as a subword. This takes time bounded by C · k for some constant C, see
e.g. [12, p. 338].
   The “usual” Whitehead algorithm, call it W, would minimize |v| taking time quadratic
in |v|. Denote the obtained element of minimum length in the orbit of v by v̄. If |v̄| ̸= |ū|,
then W stops and reports that v is not in the automorphic orbit of u. If |v̄| = |ū|, then the
algorithm W would apply all possible sequences of elementary Whitehead automorphisms
that do not change the length of v̄ to see if any of the resulting elements are equal to ū. This
part may take exponential time in |v̄| = |ū|, but since we consider |u| constant with respect
10                        ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS

to |v| and |u| bounds |ū| above, exponential time in |ū| is still constant with respect to |v|.
Thus, the total time that the algorithm W takes is quadratic in |v|.
  To address complexity of the algorithm T , we use a result from [4]:
Lemma 7.1 ([4, Example 1]). The number of (freely reduced) words of length L with (any
number of ) “forbidden” subwords (e.g. u-orbit-blocking subwords) grows exponentially slower
than the number of all freely reduced words of length L does.
  In our situation, we have at least one B(u) as a forbidden subword. Therefore, the
probability that the initial segment of length k of the word v does not have B(u) as a
subword is O(sk ) P
                  for some s, 0 < s < 1. Thus, the average time complexity of the algorithm
T is bounded by nk=1 C · k · sk , which is bounded by a constant.
Theorem 7.2. Suppose possible inputs of the above algorithm A are cyclically reduced words
that are selected uniformly at random from the set of cyclically reduced words of length n.
Then the average-case time complexity (i.e. expected runtime) of the algorithm A, working
on a classical Turing machine, is O(1), a constant that does not depend on n. If one uses the
“Deque” (double-ended queue) model of computing [6] instead of a classical Turing machine,
then the “cyclically reduced” condition on the input can be dropped.
Proof. As stated above, given the existence of orbit-blocking words for all groups Fr , where
r ≥ 2 (according to Theorem 6.1), we can proceed essentially as in the proof of Theorem
3 in [8], with only minimal modifications needed. For instance, the first statement quickly
follows from Lemma 7.1.                                                                    □
7.1. Reducing complexity further. While the above offers a theoretically fast algorithm,
one may be skeptical about its practical performance. The algorithm A has constant time
average-case complexity, but it appears that this constant may be quite large. Indeed, our
proof of Theorem 6.1 offers w-orbit-blocking words of length (2r + 1) · |w|, and thus it is
impossible to speed up the whole algorithm A until the fast part of the algorithm reads a
prefix that exceeds this length. We will offer a few ways to improve practical performance
of the fast part of the algorithm.
   The first idea is to use shorter primitivity-blocking words to construct our orbit-blocking
words. In Theorem 4.3 we give the shortest possible primitivity-blocking word, however this
word has cancellation when multiplied by itself, and so we cannot simply raise it to a power.
In order to prevent cancellation we can use vi = x1 x2 . . . x2r . . . x2 x−1
                                                                           1  when i is even and
vi = x−1
       1 x 2 . . . x2
                    r . . . x  x
                              2 1 when i is odd.
   Another option is to decrease the number of primitivity-blocking words required. By
applying Theorem 3.9 in place of Lemma 3.2, we have the following theorem:
Theorem 7.3. Let w ∈ Fr , r ≥ 3, be such that its cyclic reduction can be written as a
product of k slender words. Let {vi }k+1
                                     i=1 be a sequence of primitivity-blocking words such that
there is no cancellation between adjacent terms of the sequence, nor between vk+1 and v1 .
Then k+1
      Q
         i=1 vi is w-orbit-blocking.

   The proof follows in the same manner as that of Theorem 6.1, applying Theorem 3.9 rather
than Lemma 3.2.
   Every word of length ≤ 2r − 1 must necessarily be slender. Thus partitioning a word into
chunks of that size (or smaller) splits it as a product of slender words. For a word of length
ℓ, Theorem 6.1 implies there is an orbit-blocking word of length 2r (ℓ + 1) (using the short
                            ORBIT-BLOCKING WORDS IN FREE GROUPS                                         11

primitivity-blocking words as described above). Comparatively,
                                                                 by Theorem
                                                                               7.3 a word of
                                                                 ℓ
length ℓ has an orbit-blocking word of length at most 2r               +1 .
                                                              2r − 1
   Lastly, one could look for multiple orbit-blocking words simultaneously. Theorems 6.1
and 7.3 in essence give a limit on the number of disjoint primitivity-blocking words that can
appear in the orbit of a given word. An alternative algorithm could simply count primitivity-
blocking words in the input until the number exceeds the bound given by the fixed word.
This highlights the significance of Problem 5.1.
                                             References
   [1] D. Ascari, A fine property of Whitehead’s algorithm, Groups Geom. Dyn. 18 (2024), 235–264.
   [2] V. Bardakov, V. Shpilrain and V. Tolstykh, On the palindromic and primitive widths of a free group,
       J. Algebra 285 (2005), 574–585.
   [3] G. Baumslag, A. G. Myasnikov, V. Shpilrain, Open problems in combinatorial group theory,
       http://shpilrain.ccny.cuny.edu/gworld/problems/oproblems.html
   [4] T. Ceccherini-Silberstein, W. Woess, Growth and ergodicity of context-free languages, Trans. Amer.
       Math. Soc. 354 (2002), 4597–4625.
   [5] M. Cohen, W. Metzler, A. Zimmermann, What does a basis of F(a,b) look like?, Math. Ann. 257
       (1981), 435–445.
   [6] Double-ended queue, Wikipedia (2024), https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
       Double-ended_queue&oldid=1225841227
   [7] M. Heusener, R. Weidmann, A remark on Whitehead’s cut-vertex lemma, J. Group Theory 22 (2019),
       15–21.
   [8] L. Hyde, S. O’Connor, V. Shpilrain, Orbit-blocking words and the average-case complexity of White-
       head’s problem in the free group of rank 2, J. Group Theory 28 (2025), 423–430.
   [9] I. Kapovich, A. G. Myasnikov, P. Schupp, V. Shpilrain, Average-case complexity and decision problems
       in group theory, Advances in Math. 190 (2005), 343–359.
  [10] I. Kapovich, P. Schupp, V. Shpilrain, Generic properties of Whitehead’s algorithm and isomorphism
       rigidity of random one-relator groups, Pacific J. Math. 223 (2006), 113–140.
  [11] B. Khan, The structure of automorphic conjugacy in the free group of rank 2, Contemp. Math. Amer.
       Math. Soc. 349 (2004), 115–196.
  [12] D. Knuth, J. H. Morris, V. Pratt, Fast pattern matching in strings, SIAM Journal on Computing 6
       (2) (1977), 323–350.
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/index.php?title=Knuth%E2%80%93Morris%E2%80%93Pratt_
       algorithm&oldid=1246760417
  [13] A. Myasnikov and V. Shpilrain, Automorphic orbits in free groups, J. Algebra 269 (2003), 18–27.
  [14] V. Shpilrain, Average-case complexity of the Whitehead problem for free groups, Comm. Algebra 51
       (2023), 799–806.
  [15] J. H. C. Whitehead, On equivalent sets of elements in free groups, Ann. of Math. 37 (1936), 782–800.
  [16] J. H. C. Whitehead, On certain sets of elements in a free group, Proc. London Math. Soc. 41 (1936),
       48–56.

  Department of Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016
  Email address: lhyde@gradcenter.cuny.edu

  Department of Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016
  Email address: doconnor@gradcenter.cuny.edu

  Email address: ejolive97@gmail.com

  Department of Mathematics, The City College of New York, New York, NY 10031
  Email address: shpilrain@yahoo.com
