TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS
IN FREE GROUPS
LUCY KOCH-HYDE AND ´EAMONN OLIVE
Abstract.We will answer a problem of Dotsenko that asks for a tight upper
bound on the rank of subgroups given a maximum length for its generators.
Then, we will use the same tools to answer a longstanding problem of Grig-
orchuk in the 10th edition of the Kourovka notebook. We accomplish this
using Stallings foldings and simple graph theory.
1.Introduction
We begin with the following elementary definitions:
Definition 1.1.S n⊂F r is the set of all freely reduced words of length exactlyn,
andB n⊂F r is the set of all freely reduced words of length at mostn.
These correspond to spheres and balls around the identity ofF r under the word
metric.
Definition 1.2.LetXbe a subset of a free groupF r. Thegrowth functionofX,
gX :N→N, is defined as:
gX(n) =|X∩B n|
Definition 1.3.Theexponential growth rateofX⊆F r is
lim sup
n→∞
n
p
gX(n)
Although the above definition is standard, an equivalent definition is helpful to
indicate why this measure is notable:
Definition 1.4.Theexponential growth rateofX⊆F r is
inf{b:g X∈O(b n)}
In 1986 Grigorchuk posed the following question:
Problem 1.5([4, 10.13]).Does there exist a setX⊂F 2 such that:
(1) for allx∈X,x /∈ ⟪X−{x} ⟫.
(2)Xis “massive”. That is, it has exponential growth rate of 3 (the exponential
growth rate ofF 2 itself).
This problem is relevant in the context of group presentations. For the group
presentation⟨F 2|X⟩(giving the groupF 2/ ⟪X⟫), (1) imposes the restriction that
no part ofXis redundant, which is a desirable property. Problem 1.5 then asks
a question about how “big” a non-redundant relator set can be in terms of its
asymptotic growth.
We note that (1) is a more restrictive form of an “independent set”:
Date: August 2026.
1
arXiv:2609.00382v2  [math.GR]  3 Sep 2026

2 TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS IN FREE GROUPS
Definition 1.6.A subsetXof a groupGisindependentwhen for allx∈X,
x /∈⟨X−{x}⟩.
We will show that the answer to Problem 1.5 is “No suchXexists”. In fact, we
will prove a more general result:
Theorem 1.7.LetS⊆B n⊆F r be an independent set.
|S|∈O
√
2r−1
n
In the process of showing the above we will address a related open problem posed
by Dotsenko:
Problem 1.8([3, F42]).What is the highest rank of a subgroup ofF r generated
by elements of:
(a)S n?
(b)B n?
Our answer comes in the following theorem:
Theorem 1.9.
(a) The maximum possible rank of a subgroup ofF r generated by elements of
Sn has two cases depending on the parity ofn:( √2r−1
n
nis even
r√2r−1
n−1
nis odd
(b) The greatest rank of a subgroup ofF r generated by elements ofB n is the
same as forS n for alln.
2.Stallings foldings and core graph
A common approach to the combinatorics of subgroups of free groups derives
from two facts:
(1) The free groups are exactly the fundamental groups of graphs.
(2) There is a Galois connection between subgroups ofπ 1(X) and covering
spaces ofX.
If we fix a graph to represent a free group, we can then capture a subgroup of
the free group as a covering space of that graph. Naturally we would like to make
that graph as simple as possible, so for a free groupF r we choose the “rose graph”
Rr. That is, the graph with 1 vertex andredges. We can encode a covering as the
covering graph with an edge labeling and edge direction to determine the quotient
map. Since this graph is a covering space, our labeling is a regular edge coloring.
That is, for any vertex there is exactly one outgoing edge of for each generator in
Fr, and likewise there is exactly one type of each incoming edge.
It is possible for a subgroup of finite rank to give a covering space with infinitely
many vertices. However, in these cases there are only finitely many vertices and
edges which are “essential”. That is most of the edges and vertices lie on trees, and
so are invisible to the fundamental group. Thus, we want to perform a deformation
retract onto a finite graph, removing all the trees. This we call the “Stallings core
graph”. This is no longer a covering space, but we still have an injection from the
fundamental group intoF r.
Now we will provide a more formal definition of the Stallings core graph:

TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS IN FREE GROUPS 3
Definition 2.1.LetGbe a subgroup ofF r. TheStallings core graph ofG, denoted
Core(G), is triplet (Q,p,L) where
•Qis a quiver.
•pis a vertex.
•Lis an edge coloring by generators inF r.
with the following properties:
•The induced homomorphismL ∗ :π 1(Q,p)→F r has image exactly equal
toG. SinceLis an edge coloring,L ∗ is injective.
•For every edgee, there is a homotopy class of curves [γ]∈π 1(Q,p) such
that every curve in [γ] containse. In other words,Qis connected, and it
is not the wedge product of graph with a tree.
A detailed introduction can be found in [2]. We also recommend [1] as an ele-
mentary introduction with nice pictures.
A crucial property of Stallings core graphs is the following:
Lemma 2.2([3, Lemma 8.2]).LetGbe a subgroup ofF r. Then the
rank(G) =E−V+ 1
whereEandVare the number of edges and vertices, respectively, inCore(G).
Hence, we can find bounds for the rank of a subgroup by finding bounds for the
number of edges and vertices in its Stallings core graph.
Lemma 2.3.LetS⊆B n. The distance between the base point and any other
vertexCore(⟨S⟩)is at most
 n
2

. Furthermore, there are no edges between vertices
of distance n
2 from the base point.
Proof.Let us consider the process of finding Core(⟨S⟩) through Stallings foldings.
Initially we start with cycles corresponding to words inSjoined together at the base
point. At this point, since each cycle has a circumference of at mostn, all vertices
are within
 n
2

of the base point. Furthermore, for a vertex to be n
2 from the base
point,nmust be even and the vertex can only have edges to vertices of distance
n
2−1 from the base point. To obtain the core graph, we would apply a sequence of
foldings, each of which are graph quotients, and so the distance between any two
vertices will not increase. Thus, the bound on distance still holds in Core(⟨S⟩).
Graph quotients also cannot result in new edges between vertices. This means that
any vertex in Core(S) with an edge to a vertex of distance n
2 from the base point
must have in its preimage a vertex of distance n
2−1 from the base point, and so it
can be no further than n
2−1 from the base point.□
Lemma 2.4.IfS⊆B 2k+1 ⊂F r, thenCore(⟨S⟩)contains at most r(2r−1)k−1
r−1
vertices.
Proof.SinceS⊂F r, Core(⟨S⟩) has a maximum degree of 2r, and so it follows that
the base point can have at most 2rneighbors, each of which can have at most 2r−1
new neighbors, and so on. Since Core(⟨S⟩) cannot contain any vertex further than 2k+1
2

=kfrom the base point, and so there can be at most
1 + 2r
kX
d=1
(2r−1) d−1 = r(2r−1) k−1
r−1
vertices in Core(⟨S⟩).□

4 TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS IN FREE GROUPS
Corollary 2.5.IfS⊆B 2k+1⊂F r, thenCore(⟨S⟩)contains at mostr r(2r−1)k−1
r−1
edges.
Proof.The max degree of a Stallings core graph for a subgroup ofF r is at most 2r.
Since each edge is incident to two (not necessarily distinct) vertices, there can be
no more thanrtimes as many edges as vertices in a Stallings core graph. Hence,
for a subsetS⊆B 2k+1⊂F r, Core(⟨S⟩) contains at mostr 2(2r−1)k−1
r−1 edges.□
Lemma 2.6.IfS⊆B 2k, thenCore(⟨S⟩)contains at mostr (2r−1)k−1
r−1 edges.
Proof.Because Core(⟨S⟩) has a maximum degree of 2r, the base point has at most
2redges coming out of it, each of which connects to a vertex that has at most
2r−1 edges that have not already been counted. We can continue counting the
new edges on vertices of each distance from the base point like this to get an upper
bound. However, it is important to note that by Lemma 2.3, vertices of distancek
from the base point cannot have any edges that do not connect to a closer edge, so
we get the following as our upper bound:
2r
k−1X
d=0
(2r−1) d =r (2r−1) k−1
r−1
□
Corollary 2.7.IfS⊆B 2k, thenCore(⟨S⟩)contains at most r(2r−1)k−1
r−1 vertices.
Proof.As a Stallings core graph, Core(⟨S⟩) must be connected, and so there can
be at most one more vertex than there are edges.□
3.Maximum rank for bases
With the results of the previous section, it is straightforward to prove an upper
bound for Problem 1.8:
Lemma 3.1.The rank of a subgroup generated by elements ofB n is at most
( √2r−1
n
nis even
r√2r−1
n−1
nis odd
Proof.ConsiderG⊆B n⊂F r. Let us say Core(G) hasEedges andVvertices.
We can establish a lower bound on the number of vertices as follows: Each edge
is incident on two vertices, and each vertex can be incident on at most 2redges.
Thus,
V≥ 2E
2r = E
r
Applying Lemma 2.2 we can get a bound on the rank of the subgroup in terms of
E:
E+ 1−rank(G)≥ E
r
(r−1)E
r + 1≥rank(G)

TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS IN FREE GROUPS 5
Now, supposingnis even we can apply Lemma 2.6 to get a bound on rank(G) in
terms ofnandr:
rank(G)≤ (r−1)E
r + 1
≤
(r−1)r
√2r−1n−1
r−1
r + 1
=
√
2r−1
n
Now we will obtain a bound on the rank ofGin terms of the vertices.
V≥ E
r
V≥ rank(G) +V−1
r
(r−1)V+ 1≥rank(G)
Now we apply Lemma 2.4 to get a bound in terms ofnandr
rank(G)≤(r−1)V+ 1
≤(r−1) r√2r−1
n−1
−1
r−1 + 1
=r
√
2r−1
n−1
□
However, it remains to be seen that this upper bound is in fact attainable. Here
we will provide two classes of bases inS n with rank equal to the upper bound given
by Lemma 3.1. LetP r(k)⊂F r be the set of all words of the formwx iι(w)−1 where
xi is a generator ofF r,wis a word of lengthkthat does not end inx −1
i , andι
is the automorphism ofF r that maps each of the generators ofF r to its inverse.
Fixx 1 to be a generator ofF r andφto be an automorphism ofF r that cyclically
permutes the set of generators and inverses of generators ofF r, and letQ r(k)⊂F r
be the set of all words of the formx 1wφ(m)(x1w)−1, wherewis a word of length
k−1 that does not begin withx −1
1 and 1≤m<2r. To demonstrate that these are
in fact bases we will show that they are Nielsen reduced sets using the conditions
outlined in the following lemma:
Lemma 3.2([5, Lemma 3.1]).LetR⊆F r. ThenRis Nielsen reduced if and only
if the following conditions are satisfied.
(1) For eachw∈R, its prefix and suffix of length
l
|w|
2
m
, its major initial and
major terminal segment, do not appear as the prefix or suffix, respectively,
of any other word inR ±1.
(2) For eachw∈Rof even length, its prefix and suffix of length w
2 , its left and
right half, do not appear as the prefix or suffix, respectively, of any other
word inR ±1.
We can now show that the sets given byP r(k) andQ r(k) are indeed bases with
rank equal to the upper bound given in Lemma 3.1, thereby solving Problem 1.8.
Proof of Theorem 1.9.SinceP r(k) contains only words of length 2k+ 1, we only
need to satisfy (1) from Lemma 3.2 to show that it is Nielsen reduced. No word in

6 TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS IN FREE GROUPS
Pr(k) can share a major initial or major terminal segment with a word inP r(k)−1,
since the middle letter of any element inP r(k) is always positive, where as in
Pr(k)−1 it would always be negative. Furthermore, by examining the first or last
k+1 letters we can fully identify the values ofwandx i, thereby uniquely identifying
the entire word. ForQ r(k), since all the words it contains are of length 2k, we must
show that both that conditions of Lemma 3.2 are satisfied for all words inQ r(k).
Because the right half of the word is a suffix of the major terminal segment, it is
sufficient to show that for any wordx 1wφ(m)(x1w)−1∈Q r(k), neither its major
initial segment nor its right half are the prefix or suffix, respectively, of any other
word inQ r(k)±1. The last letter of any word inQ r(k) is of the formφ (m)(x−1
1 ),
and so, is notx−1, which means that no word inQ r(k) share a non-trivial prefix or
suffix with a word inQ r(k)−1. Furthermore, by examining either the major initial
segment or the right half of a word inQ r(k), we can findwandm, thereby uniquely
identifying the word.
Finally, let us quickly confirm that forn= 2k+ 1,|P r(k)|=r √2r−1
n−1
and
forn= 2k,|Q r(k)|= √2r−1
n
. ForP r(k), all words are of the formwx iι(w)−1,
and so we haverchoices forx i, and then for each selection ofx i, (2r−1) k choices
forw, giving a total size ofr(2r−1) k =r√2r−1
n−1
words wheren= 2k+ 1. For
Qr(k), all words are of the formx 1wφ(m)(x1w)−1, which means we have (2r−1)k−1
choices forwand 2r−1 choices form, for a total of (2r−1) k =√2r−1
n
words
wheren= 2k.
Thus, the maximum possible rank of a subgroup generated by elements ofS n is
at least ( √2r−1
n
nis even
r√2r−1
n−1
nis odd
BecauseS n⊆B n, Lemma 3.1 shows that this is precisely the maximum possible
rank in theS n case. This result applies for theB n case as well due to Lemma 3.1
and the fact thatS n⊆B n.□
4.Problem 10.13
The results above can be applied to show Theorem 1.7 and thus solve Prob-
lem 1.5.
We start with a small technical lemma. The following has a somewhat complex
precise statement, but the idea is simple.
Lemma 4.1.LetS⊂F r be a finite independent set. LetK⊆Sbe a maximal
basis. That is,Kis a basis of⟨K⟩andKis not contained within a larger subset
ofSforming a basis. Now letwbe some word independent ofS. If the number of
vertices inCore(S∪w)is greater than or equal to the number of vertices inCore(S),
thenK∪wis a basis.
Proof.Suppose first that there is some vertex onwwhich is not identified with any
vertex in Core(S). Notice then thatwcannot identify existing vertices of Core(S)
either; addingwto Core(S) simply adds a “bridge” between existing vertices. Now
suppose every vertex onwis identified with a vertex in Core(S). Addingwcannot
increase the number of vertices, so it must leave the number of vertices unchanged.
Thus, again,wcannot identify existing vertices of Core(S), and again addingw

TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS IN FREE GROUPS 7
Figure 3.3.The Stallings core graph for one of the greatest rank
subgroups ofF 2 generated by words of length 5.
Figure 3.4.The Stallings core graph for one of the greatest rank
subgroups ofF 2 generated by words of length 6.

8 TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS IN FREE GROUPS
adds a bridge between existing vertices (this time consisting of a single edge). Thus,
Core(S) is a strict subgraph of Core(X∪w).
Letαbe the natural covering map Core(K∪w)→Core(S∪w). Now because
Core(S) is a subgraph of Core(S∪w), we can consider the preimageα −1 (Core(S)).
Naturally, this is exactly Core(K), and thus Core(K) is a strict subgraph of Core(K∪
w). Thus, rank(⟨K⟩)<rank(⟨K∪w⟩), and soK∪wis a basis.□
We will now give a version of Theorem 1.7 with more explicit bounds. This is
intended for ease of reference, but we think that this bound is actually quite weak.
Theorem 4.2.LetS⊆B n⊆F r be an independent set.
|S|∈O
√
2r−1
n
Specifically,|S|can never be greater than the number of edges in the core graph of
a subgroup generated by elements ofB n:
|S|≤
(
r
√2r−1n−1
r−1 nis even
r r√2r−1n−1−1
r−1 nis odd
Proof of Theorem 1.7.LetK⊆Sbe a maximal basis. Now consider an ordering
s1,s 2,...,s n onS−K. LetS i =K∪{s 1,...,s i}. By Lemma 4.1 Core(⟨S i+1⟩)
must have fewer vertices than Core(⟨S i⟩). Thus,S−Kmust have less elements
than Core(⟨K⟩) has vertices. Thus,|S|≤rank(⟨K⟩)+V−1 whereVis the number
of vertices in Core(⟨K⟩). By Lemma 2.2, rank(⟨K⟩) +V−1 is the number of edges
in Core(⟨K⟩), which we shall callE. Now we have that|S|≤E, and by Lemma 2.6
and Corollary 2.5, we have an explicit bound on the number of edges.□
Now we will make explicit the application of this theorem to Problem 1.5.
Solution to Problem 1.5.LetS⊂F r be an independent set.S∩B n is also an
independent set for alln. By definition,g S(n) =|S∩B n|. Thus, by Theorem 1.7,
gS(n)∈O
√2r−1
n
. Therefore, the answer to Problem 1.5 is “No”.□
An immediate question is whether the bound given in Theorem 1.7 can be
brought down. While we maintain that we believe the fine bound can be brought
down, we will show that one cannot bring the bound on the growth of independent
sets much further down.
Proposition 4.3.LetF r be a finitely generated non-Abelian free group. For every
b< √2r−1, there exists an independent setS⊂F r such that
gS(n)∈Ω (b n)
Proof.Let{x 1,x 2,...,x r}be a basis ofF r. LetY n be all words inF r not containing
x±n
1 and not ending withx ±1
1 . It is clear that for everyc<2r−1 there is somen
such that
gYn(n)∈Ω(c n)
That is asngrows, the growth rates ofY n get closer and closer to that ofF r.
Now letnbe the value given above whenc=b 2. We will construct our indepen-
dent setSas all conjugates ofx 2n
1 by elements ofY n. It is clear thatSis an inde-
pendent set. Furthermore, two elementsy 0,y 1∈Y n give unique conjugates ofx n
1
of lengths 2|y 0|+nand 2|y 1|+nrespectively. Thus,g S(n)∈Ω( √cn) = Ω(bn).□

TWO PROBLEMS ABOUT BASES AND INDEPENDENT SETS IN FREE GROUPS 9
5.Questions
Since we have solved two problems, we would like to pose three.
We’ve shown a reasonably tight bound on the worst-case growth rate of an
independent set (Theorem 1.7 and Proposition 4.3), but it leaves a loose end:
Problem 5.1.In a finitely generated free groupF r, does there exist some inde-
pendent subset with exponential growth rate exactly √2r−1?
The solution to Grigorchuk’s problem is only the beginning of a broader problem.
Once we have shown no such set is massive, it is natural to ask what further can
be shown about the growth of such a set. Thus, we pose the following question as
a next step:
Problem 5.2.Does there exist a setS⊂F r such that:
•for alls∈S,s /∈ ⟪S−{s} ⟫.
•Sgrows exponentially. That is,b n∈O(g S(n)) for someb>1.
We conjecture the answer to Problem 5.2 is “No”.
Lastly, we will pose a related question to Problem 1.8:
Problem 5.3.What is the largest independent subset of:
(a)S n⊂F r?
(b)B n⊂F r?
Here we know that the answer lies in Θ
√2r−1
n
but a finer characterization
would be interesting. Although we will not prove it, it is not hard to see using the
results provided herein that the following is an upper bound:
ρ(r,n) +⌊log 2(v(r,n))⌋
whereρis the maximum rank of a basis given in Theorem 1.9, andvis the upper
bound on the number of vertices given in Lemma 2.4 and Corollary 2.7.
References
[1] Matt Clay,Free groups and folding, Office hours with a geometric group theorist, 2017, pp. 66–
84.
[2] Ilya Kapovich and Alexei Myasnikov,Stallings foldings and the subgroup structure of free
groups, Journal of Algebra248(2002), no. 2, 608–668.
[3] Ilya Kapovich, Alexei Myasnikov, and Vladimir Shpilrain,Combinatorial group theory: Open
problems on infinite groups, De Gruyter, 2026.
[4] E. I. Khukhro and V. D. Mazurov,Unsolved problems in group theory. The Kourovka notebook,
10th ed., 1986.
[5] Wilhelm Magnus, Abraham Karrass, and Donald Solitar,Combinatorial group theory; presen-
tations of groups in terms of generators and relations, Pure and applied mathematics, v. 13,
Interscience Publishers, New York, 1966 (eng).
Department of Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016
Email address:Lucy.Koch-Hyde96@gc.cuny.edu
Department of Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016
Email address:Eamon.Olive89@gc.cuny.edu