                                               JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR
                                                TWO-GENERATOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS

                                                   GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN
arXiv:2101.02193v3 [math.GR] 21 Oct 2025




                                                  Abstract. We provide a direct connection between the Zmax (or
                                                  essential) JSJ decomposition and the Friedl–Tillmann polytope of
                                                  a hyperbolic two-generator one-relator group with abelianisation
                                                  of rank 2.
                                                     We deduce various structural and algorithmic properties, like
                                                  the existence of a quadratic-time algorithm computing the Zmax -
                                                  JSJ decomposition of such groups.




                                                        Dedicated to the memory of Stephen J. Pride




                                                                       1. Introduction
                                              A two-generator one-relator group is a group that admits a presen-
                                           tation of the form ⟨a, b | R⟩. One-relator groups are a cornerstone of
                                           Geometric Group Theory (see, for example, the classic texts in com-
                                           binatorial group theory [MKS04] [LS77] or the early work of Mag-
                                           nus [Mag30] [Mag32]), and they continue to have fruitful interactions
                                           with, for example, 3-dimensional topology and knot theory. Motivated
                                           by the Thurston norm of a 3-manifold, Friedl–Tillmann introduced a
                                           polytope for presentations ⟨a, b | R⟩ with R ∈ F (a, b)′ [FT20], which
                                           has subsequently been shown to be a group invariant [HK20] (another
                                           proof of this fact follows from the work of Friedl–Lück [FL17] com-
                                           bined with a more recent result of Jaikin-Zapirain–López-Álvarez on
                                           the Atiyah conjecture [JZLA20]).
                                              In this paper we focus on hyperbolic one-relator groups, and more
                                           generally one-relator groups with no Baumslag–Solitar subgroups ⟨a, t |
                                           t−1 am t = an ⟩; we call these algebraic generalisations of hyperbolic one-
                                           relator groups BS-free one-relator groups. JSJ-theory rose to promi-
                                           nence due to Sela’s work on Zmax -JSJ decompositions (originally called

                                             2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20E34, 20F05, 20F65, 20F67, 20J05.
                                             Key words and phrases. One-relator group, JSJ decomposition, polytope.
                                                                                 1
2         GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

“essential” JSJ decompositions) of hyperbolic groups, which are graph
of groups decompositions encoding all the “important” virtually-Z split-
tings of the group; these decompositions are significant because they
are a group invariant (up to certain moves), and they, and hence the
splittings they encode, govern for example the model theory [Sel09]
and (coarsely) the outer automorphism group [Sel97] [Lev05a] of the
group. Moreover, computing Zmax -JSJ decompositions is a key step in
the algorithm to solve the isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups
[Sel95] [DG08] [DG11]. The notation Zmax relates to a certain class
of maximal virtually cyclic subgroups, but for one-relator groups these
subgroups are necessarily infinite cyclic; therefore one can view our re-
sults as being about “Zmax -JSJ decompositions”, but we maintain the
Zmax notation for consistency with the literature.
   Our main theorem connects Zmax -JSJ decompositions and Friedl–
Tillmann polytopes [FT20]. This connection is significant because it
means that, under our assumptions, the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of
⟨a, b | R⟩ can be understood simply by investigating the relator R,
which yields fast algorithmic results (see below). Furthermore, this
gives a connection between JSJ decompositions and these polytopes, as
JSJ decompositions are refinements of Zmax -JSJ decompositions [GL17,
Section 9.5].
   Friedl–Tillmann polytopes are only defined for two-generator one-
relator groups, and such groups are of central importance in the theory
of one-relator groups. For example, it is a classical result that ev-
ery one-relator group embeds into a two-generator one-relator group
[MKS04, Corollary 4.10.1], while Louder–Wilton have pointed out that
all known examples of pathological one-relator groups have two gener-
ators [LW22]. Moreover, BS-free two-generator one-relator groups are
particularly important: It is a famous conjecture of Gersten that every
BS-free one-relator group is hyperbolic (see [Ger92, p. 228], [AG99, Re-
mark, p. 734]), and Linton proved that this conjecture reduces to the
two generator case [Lin24, Corollary 5.7], i.e. every BS-free one-relator
group is hyperbolic if and only if every BS-free two-generator one-
relator group is hyperbolic.
   We say that a one-ended group has trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition if
it has a Zmax -JSJ decomposition which is a single vertex with no edges,
and non-trivial otherwise (see Convention 2.8).
Theorem A (Theorem 5.4). Let G be a BS-free group admitting a two-
generator one-relator presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ with R ∈ F (a, b)′ \
{1}. The following are equivalent.
   (1) G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition.
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                   3

   (2) There exists a word T of shortest length in the Aut(F (a, b))-
       orbit of R such that T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ but T is not conjugate to
       [a, b]k for any k ∈ Z.
   (3) The Friedl–Tillmann polytope of P is a straight line, but not a
       single point.
   It is unclear how intrinsic hyperbolicity is to this theorem. If Ger-
sten’s conjecture is true, then the result is simply for hyperbolic two-
generator one-relator groups. On the other hand, an analogue of The-
orem A will hold for any class of one-relator groups for which Theorem
4.1, below, on Friedl–Tillmann polytopes is applicable, and which sat-
isfy a certain description of splittings first given by Kapovich–Weidmann
[KW99a, Theorem 3.9], and extended by the authors [GKL21, Corol-
lary 8.6]. (Indeed, Zmax -JSJ decompositions are not required. They
just give context and a convenient language for our results, which in-
stead can be stated in terms of “essential Z-splittings”, as in Theorem
2.9.)
   We now illustrate Theorem A with an example.
Example 1.1. Let G be the group defined by the presentation ⟨a, b |
(a2 b2 a−1 b−1 a−1 b−1 )n ⟩ where n > 1. By using Whitehead’s algorithm, it
can be seen that (2) of Theorem A does not hold, and so G has trivial
Zmax -JSJ decomposition. Alternatively one can consider the Friedl–
Tillmann polytope, which we see from Figure 1 is a triangle. There-
fore, (3) of Theorem A does not hold, and so G has trivial Zmax -JSJ
decomposition.
   The proof of Theorem A splits into two cases: either G is a one-
relator group with torsion, or is torsion-free. The difficulty lies in the
torsion-free case; see in particular Section 4.
   If G does not have Z2 abelianisation, so R ̸∈ F (a, b)′ , then the Friedl–
Tillmann polytope is less useful (it is always a straight line!). However,
we can still ask if (1) and (2) from Theorem A are equivalent. To prove
this, we could try to apply the machinery underlying these polytopes,
which is that of the universal L2 torsion, but unfortunately this lies be-
yond our current understanding of these L2 invariants. We can however
use more classical techniques to prove this equivalence for one-relator
groups with torsion.

One-relator groups with torsion. The easier case in the proof of
Theorem A is that of one relator groups with torsion. Such groups
are characterised by having presentations ⟨x | S n ⟩ where n > 1 [LS77,
Proposition II.5.18]. They are always hyperbolic [LS77, Theorem IV.5.5]
(Nyberg-Brodda has put this fact in its historical context [NB21]), and
4         GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN




      Figure 1. To obtain the Friedl–Tillmann polytope, trace
      the reduced word (a2 b2 a−1 b−1 a−1 b−1 )n on the ab-plane
      to obtain a closed loop γ, as in the first diagram (this
      is independent of n). Take the convex hull of γ, as in
      the second diagram; this is a polytope P ′ . Then take
      the bottom-left corner of all squares contained in γ that
      touch the vertices of P ′ , as in the third diagram. The
      Friedl–Tillmann polytope P is the polytope with these
      points as vertices, as in the fourth diagram.

      Note that the Friedl–Tillmann polytope is in fact a
      “marked” polytope, but we only care about the shape
      so we have omitted these details from this example. In
      the third diagram we took the bottom-left corner of the
      squares; this is different from Friedl and Tillmann who take
      the centre points of these squares, but this is not an issue
      because the polytope is only well-defined up to translation.


as such these groups are of great interest as test-cases for both hyper-
bolic groups and one-relator groups. For example, one-relator groups
with torsion are residually finite [Wis12], while it is an open problem of
Gromov whether all hyperbolic groups are residually finite; similarly,
one-relator groups with torsion were shown to be coherent in [LW20],
while it took another five years to show that in fact all one-relator
groups are coherent [JZL25].
  Our results for one-relator groups with torsion include the case of
R ̸∈ F (a, b)′ . A primitive element of F (a, b) is an element which is
part of a basis for F (a, b).

Theorem B (Theorem 3.4). Let G be a group admitting a two-generator
one-relator presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ where R = S n in F (a, b) with
n > 1 maximal and S ∈ F (a, b) is non-trivial and non-primitive. The
following are equivalent.
    (1) G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition.
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                  5

   (2) There exists a word T of shortest length in the Aut(F (a, b))-
       orbit of S such that T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ but T is not conjugate to
       [a, b]±1 .

  The conditions on S are because Zmax -JSJ decompositions are only
meaningful for one-ended groups, and if S is primitive or trivial then
the group defined by ⟨a, b | S n ⟩ is not one-ended (it is a free product of
cyclic groups, Z ∗ Cn or Z ∗ Z). In contrast, all the groups in Theorem
A are one-ended.

Forms of Zmax -JSJ decompositions. The following corollary de-
scribes the Zmax -JSJ decompositions of the groups from Theorems A
and B as HNN-extensions of one-relator groups.
   In the torsion-free case, a previous result of the authors describes
such Zmax -JSJ decompositions as HNN-extensions [GKL21, Corollary
8.6]; Corollary C further says that the base groups are one-relator
groups, which is surprising. In the corollary, we view R as a power
S n for n ⩾ 1 maximal. We view R like this because Theorem B deals
with the root S of the relator R = S n . We lose nothing by doing this
since if the group in the corollary is torsion-free then n = 1 and R = S.
We use |W | to denote the length of a word W ∈ F (x).

Corollary C (Corollary 6.1). Let the group G and the presentation
P be as in Theorem A or B, and write R = S n for n ⩾ 1 maximal.
Suppose that G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition Γ. Then the
graph underlying Γ consists of a single rigid vertex and a single loop
edge. Moreover, the corresponding HNN-extension has vertex group
⟨a, y | T0n (a, y)⟩, stable letter b, and attaching map given by y = b−1 ab,
where T0 (a, b−1 ab) is the word T from the theorem. Finally, |T0 | < |S|.

   In the case of Theorem B, the base group ⟨a, y | T0 (a, y)⟩ also sat-
isfies the conditions of Theorem B. Therefore, the “|T0 | < |S|” con-
dition gives a strong accessibility result, similar to a general result of
Louder–Touikan [LT17], but where all the groups involved are one-
relator groups. If we are in the case of Theorem A then T0 (a, y) may
not be in the derived subgroup, and so we do not obtain the analogous
result.

Example 1.2. Set G = ⟨a, b | (a−2 b−1 a2 b)n ⟩, n > 1. Then G is an
HNN-extension of the group H = ⟨a, y | (a−2 y 2 )n ⟩, with attaching map
y = b−1 ab. This obvious decomposition of G as an HNN-extension
corresponds to its Zmax -JSJ decomposition, by Corollary C.
6         GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

   This example illustrates an important point: we can spot Zmax -JSJ
decompositions of the groups in Theorem A or B, since if a decomposi-
tions looks like a Zmax -JSJ decomposition then it is indeed a Zmax -JSJ
decomposition (see Theorems 2.9 and 3.2). Now, the group G from
Example 1.2 can also be viewed as an HNN-extension of the group
H ′ = ⟨a, z | (a−2 z)n ⟩, with attaching map z = b−1 a2 b. This is not
a Zmax -splitting (as ⟨z⟩ is not maximal in G), but it could be a JSJ
decomposition of G. However, we were unable to prove analogues of
Theorems 2.9 and 3.2 for JSJ decompositions, and so we are unable to
conclude that this splitting is in fact a JSJ decomposition.

Algorithmic consequences. Computing Zmax -JSJ decompositions
has implications for the isomorphism problem, gives information about
outer automorphism groups, and is potentially an important first step
for many algorithmic questions about the elementary theory of hyper-
bolic groups [DG08]. However, current algorithms for computing JSJ
decompositions or Zmax -JSJ decompositions have bad computational
complexity.
   For example, algorithms of Barrett [Bar18], Dahmani–Groves [DG08],
Dahmani–Guirardel [DG11], and Dahmani–Touikan [DT19] work in
very general settings, but each of them when applied to hyperbolic
groups has no recursive bound on its time complexity. For the algo-
rithms of Barrett, Dahmani–Groves, and Dahmani–Guirardel, this is
because they require computation of the hyperbolicity constant δ, and
there is no recursive bound on the time complexity for computing δ
(as hyperbolicity is undecidable). The algorithm of Dahmani–Touikan
requires a solution to the word problem, but all known general solu-
tions for hyperbolic groups require preprocessing for which there is no
recursive bound on the time complexity (for example, computing an
automatic structure or Dehn presentation). Even if we assume an or-
acle gives us δ, these algorithms are brute force algorithms, with each
proceeding by detecting a splitting and then searching blindly through
all presentations of the given group to find some presentation which
realises the detected splitting; this procedure clearly has an awful time
complexity. As far as the authors are aware, the only algorithm which
computes the JSJ decompositions for a class of hyperbolic groups and
which has a known (reasonable) bound on its time complexity is due
to Suraj Krishna [MS20], but here the computed bound is doubly ex-
ponential and is not in general applicable to one-relator groups.
   Theorems A and B can be applied to give fast algorithms for both de-
tecting and computing Zmax -JSJ decompositions in our setting. Firstly,
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                7

there is a quadratic-time algorithm to find the Zmax -JSJ decomposi-
tion of a given group (essentially, the algorithm is to compute all of the
shortest possible elements of the Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of the relator R).
Corollary D (Corollary 6.2). There exists an algorithm with input a
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ of a group G from Theorem A or B, and
with output the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G.
  This algorithm terminates in O(|R|2 )-steps.
   In the case of Theorem A, the polytope allows us to detect a non-
trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition in linear time (essentially, the algorithm
is to draw the Friedl–Tillmann polytope).
Corollary E (Corollary 6.3). There exists an algorithm with input a
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ of a group G from Theorem A, and with
output yes if the group G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition and
no otherwise.
  This algorithm terminates in O(|R|)-steps.
   Detecting non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decompositions is useful in its own
right. We demonstrate this with the following application of Corollaries
D and E to hyperbolic groups.
Corollary F (Corollary 6.4). There exists an algorithm with input a
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ of a hyperbolic group G from Theorem
A or B that determines which one of the following three possibilities
holds: the outer automorphism group of G is finite, is virtually Z, or
is isomorphic to GL2 (Z).
   If G is as in Theorem A, this algorithm terminates in O(|R|)-steps.
Else, it terminates in O(|R|2 )-steps.

Relationships between outer automorphism groups. Write Gk
for the group defined by ⟨a, b | S k ⟩, where k ⩾ 1 is maximal and S is
fixed. In general there is very little relationship between Out(G1 ) and
Out(Gn ) for n > 1. For example, if S = b−1 a2 ba−4 then G1 = BS(2, 4)
has non-finitely generated outer automorphism group [CL83], while
Out(Gn ) for n ⩾ 2 is virtually-Z [Log16b]. In contrast, Theorems A
and B imply that if S ∈ F (a, b)′ and G1 is hyperbolic then the triviality
of the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of Gk depends solely on the word S; the
exponent k is irrelevant. We can then apply the relationship between
Zmax -JSJ decompositions and outer automorphism groups to see that
Out(Gm ) and Out(Gn ) are commensurable for m, n ⩾ 1. Our next
corollary says that this relationship is much stronger.
8         GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

Corollary G (Corollary 6.5). Write Gk for the group defined by ⟨a, b |
S k ⟩, where k ⩾ 1 is maximal. If S ∈ F (a, b)′ \ {1} and G1 is hyperbolic
then:

    (1) Out(Gm ) ∼
                 = Out(Gn ) for all m, n > 1.
    (2) Out(Gn ) embeds with finite index in Out(G1 ).

  The isomorphism of (1) is essentially already known, and holds un-
der the more general restriction that S is non-primitive [Log16b]; we
include it for completeness. All the maps here are extremely natural,
and in particular the embedding Out(Gn ) ,→ Out(G1 ) is induced by
the natural map Gn → G1 with kernel normally generated by S.

What about JSJ decompositions? Most of our main results can
be stated in terms of JSJ decompositions, but we state them in terms
of Zmax -JSJ decompositions as this gives a smoother exposition. Noth-
ing is lost by doing this as Zmax -JSJ decompositions encode all the
information we are interested in and motivated by (outer automor-
phism groups, isomorphism problem), and in fact we gain Corollary
D, which we are unable to rephrase in terms of JSJ decompositions.
Additionally, when we rephrase Corollary C in these terms then the
phrase “T0 (a, b−1 ab) is the word T from the theorem” is replaced with
“T0 (a, b−1 ab) is some word”, so we lose the explicit connection with the
theorems.

Outline of the paper. In Section 2 we build a theory of Zmax -JSJ
decompositions applicable to the non-hyperbolic groups in Theorem
A, and we prove a useful theorem which allows us to spot Zmax -JSJ
decompositions of these groups (Theorem 2.9). In Section 3 we prove
Theorem B. In Section 4 we prove our main technical result involving
polytopes, Theorem 4.1, which takes as input a pair of compatible
presentations of some group G, one having the form ⟨a, b | R⟩ with
R ∈ F (a, b)′ and the other the form ⟨a, b | s⟩ with s ⊂ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩, and
proves that the Friedl–Tillmann polytope of G is a straight line. In
Section 5 we prove Theorem A. In Section 6 we prove Corollaries C–G.

Acknowledgements. We are very grateful to Nicholas Touikan for
several helpful comments and suggestions. We thank the referee for
their helpful comments. This work has received funding from the Eu-
ropean Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme, Grant agreement No.
850930, from the European Union (ERC, SATURN, 101076148), from
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                9

the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EP-
SRC), grant EP/R035814/1, and from the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Project-ID 427320536 –
SFB 1442, as well as under Germany’s Excellence Strategy EXC 2044–
390685587 and EXC-2047/1 – 390685813.

    2. JSJ-theory and algebraically hyperbolic groups
   JSJ-theory plays a key role in the theory of hyperbolic groups [RS97,
Sel95, Lev05a, Sel09, DG11]. Mirroring the JSJ decomposition of 3-
manifolds, the JSJ and Zmax -JSJ decompositions of a one-ended hyper-
bolic group are graph of groups decompositions where all edge groups
are virtually-Z, and are (in an appropriate sense) unique if certain ver-
tices, called “flexible vertices”, are treated as pieces to be left intact
and not decomposed. Zmax -JSJ decompositions were originally called
“essential JSJ decompositions” by Sela, and they contain all the im-
portant information used in the applications of JSJ-theory cited above.
We refer the reader to Guirardel–Levitt’s monograph for further back-
ground and motivation, in particular their Section 9.5 on Zmax -JSJ
decompositions [GL17].
   In this section we define JSJ decompositions and Zmax -JSJ decompo-
sitions. We then build a theory of Zmax -JSJ decompositions for certain
algebraically hyperbolic (CSAQ ) groups, as defined below, and which
is applicable to the BS-free one-relator groups considered in this pa-
per. Our main result here is Theorem 2.9, which can be summarised
by: when a decomposition looks like a Zmax -JSJ decomposition, it is
indeed a Zmax -JSJ decomposition.
   This section deals with graph of groups splittings, so we now fix
some conventions and notation (based on Serre’s book [Ser03]). In
a graph Γ, every edge e, with initial and terminal vertices ι(e) and
τ (e), respectively, has an associated reverse edge e such that ι(e) =
τ (e) and τ (e) = ι(e). We use Γ to denote a graph of groups, with
a connected underlying graph Γ, associated vertex groups (or vertex
stabilisers) {Gv | v ∈ V (Γ)} and edge groups (or edge stabilisers)
{Ge | e ∈ E(Γ), Ge = Ge }, and set of monomorphisms θe : Ge → Gι(e) .

JSJ decompositions. We fix a finitely generated group G, and a
family A of subgroups of G. (It is usual to assume that A is closed
under conjugating and taking subgroups, but the main class we focus
on, Zmax subgroups, is not closed under these operations.)
  An A-tree of G is a tree T equipped with an action of G, written
G ↷ T , whose edge stabilisers are in A. A subgroup H ⩽ G is elliptic
10        GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

in T if it fixes a point in T (and hence is contained in a vertex stabiliser
of T ), and universally A-elliptic if it is elliptic in every A-tree of G. An
A-tree T is universally A-elliptic if its edge stabilisers are universally
A-elliptic. An A-tree T dominates the A-tree T ′ if every subgroup of
G which is elliptic in T is elliptic in T ′ . An A-JSJ tree T of G is an
A-tree such that:
    (1) T is universally A-elliptic, and
    (2) T dominates every other universally A-elliptic tree T ′ .
The quotient graph of groups Γ, with underlying graph Γ = T /G, is
an A-JSJ decomposition of G. A vertex of an A-tree T is elementary if
its group is in A, while a non-elementary vertex is rigid if its group is
universally A-elliptic, and flexible otherwise. Flexible vertices are the
“pieces to be left intact and not decomposed” mentioned above, and
these play a very minor role in this paper.
   We shall principally consider four such families A:
    (1) The family of VC subgroups consists of virtually-Z subgroups of
         G. All the trees we consider are VC, so we shall abbreviate “VC-
         tree”, “VC-JSJ tree” and “VC-JSJ decomposition” to simply
         tree, JSJ tree and JSJ decomposition, respectively.
    (2) The family of Z subgroups consists of virtually-Z subgroups of
         G with infinite centre. For all the groups we are dealing with,
         any Z subgroup is infinite cyclic [KS71, Č71], so we often use Z
         in place of Z.
    (3) The family of Zmax subgroups consists of maximal virtually-Z
         subgroups of G with infinite centre. For the same reason as
         above, we often use Zmax in place of Zmax .
    (4) The family of Z  e subgroups consists of those Z subgroups H such
         that if K is abelian with H ⩽ K ⩽ G then K is also infinite
         cyclic.
   The theory of Zmax -JSJ decompositions for hyperbolic groups is es-
pecially powerful because there are canonical structures: for each group
G there is a unique “deformation space” of Zmax -JSJ trees, and there is
a canonical Zmax -JSJ tree [GL17, Section 9.5]. We wish to extend these
results to Zmax -JSJ trees of the groups in Theorem A. To facilitate this,
we consider algebraically hyperbolic groups.

2.1. Algebraically hyperbolic groups. A torsion-free group is alge-
braically hyperbolic, written CSAQ , if it is commutative-transitive and
contains no subgroups of the form H ⋊ Z with H non-trivial locally
cyclic. We are interested in algebraically hyperbolic groups because
torsion-free one-relator groups are algebraically hyperbolic if and only
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 11

if they are BS-free [GKL21, Theorem B], and because we can readily
study their Zmax -JSJ decompositions, or equivalently (by torsion-free-
ness) their Zmax -JSJ decompositions.
   The results in this section and at the start of the next are already
known for hyperbolic groups, so the reader who is only interested in
hyperbolic groups may skip to Proposition 2.5 of Section 2.2.
   A group G is called CSA (for conjugately separated abelian) if every
maximal abelian subgroup of G is malnormal. Algebraically hyperbolic
groups are CSA [GKL21, Theorem D], and so our starting point for the
study of their Zmax -JSJ decompositions is the existing theory of JSJ
decompositions of CSA groups [GL17, Theorem 9.5]. (The notation
CSAQ comes from the fact that a torsion-free group is algebraically hy-
perbolic if and only if it is a CSA group where every non-trivial abelian
subgroup is locally infinite cyclic, i.e. CSA and abelian subgroups em-
bed into (Q, +)).
   We have kept this section short, and only prove the few results we
need. In particular, we focus on CSAQ groups rather than CSA groups,
and we only prove that Zmax -JSJ decompositions exist under certain
conditions. We suspect that this section can be extended into a com-
plete Zmax -JSJ theory for CSA groups.


2.1.1. Existence. We start by proving that certain CSAQ groups have
Zmax -JSJ decompositions. To do this we follow the analogous existence
proof for hyperbolic groups (see for example [GL17, Section 9.5] or
[DG11, Sections 4.3 & 4.4]), although an extra step is needed to deal
with the existence of cyclic subgroups not contained in Z.  e
   We restrict ourselves to those CSAQ groups whose JSJ decomposi-
tions have no flexible vertices. This sidesteps subtleties in the proof for
hyperbolic groups (see the discussion following Remark 9.29 of [GL17],
or [DG11, Remark 4.13]), but is the only situation used in this paper.

The cyclic collapsed tree of cylinders TJSJ . Let G be a finitely
generated one-ended CSAQ group. Then G admits a canonical JSJ
tree TJSJ , namely the cyclic collapsed tree of cylinders of Guirardel–
Levitt [GL17, Theorem 9.5]. This is a bipartite tree with vertex set
V0 (TJSJ ) ⊔ V1 (TJSJ ), where V0 (TJSJ ) consists of non-elementary vertices
and V1 (TJSJ ) consists of elementary vertices. Note that edge groups are
subgroups of finite index in the vertex groups of elementary vertices,
essentially since non-trivial subgroups of Z are of finite index. The
action G ↷ TJSJ is minimal, that is TJSJ has no proper G-invariant sub-
tree (this is an ambient assumption in Guirardel–Levitt’s monograph
12        GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

[GL17, Section 1.2]). We adapt this tree to obtain a canonical Zmax -
JSJ tree TZmax , which also has certain nice properties (e.g. invariance
under group automorphisms).
  There are two obstacles to overcome for TJSJ . Firstly, elementary
vertex groups may be contained in non-cyclic abelian subgroups, and
secondly, elementary vertex groups may not be maximal abelian.

The Z e c -collapse of TJSJ . Let C be a Z subgroup of a CSAQ group G.
Zorn’s lemma guarantees the existence of a maximal abelian subgroup
A of G containing C. Let A′ be another maximal abelian subgroup
of G containing C. Take a ∈ A′ . As a centralises C, we have that C
is a non-trivial subgroup of aAa−1 , and so by malnormality of A we
have that a ∈ A. Hence A′ = A, and we have shown that if C is a
Z subgroup of a CSAQ group G then there exists a unique maximal
abelian subgroup containing C; we will denote this subgroup by Ĉ.
Note that Ĉ is locally cyclic, although may not be cyclic, and that
the family Z   e consists of those Z subgroups C such that Ĉ is still a Z
subgroup.
   We will use Z   e c to denote the complement of the family Z     e within
Z-subgroups, so the family consisting of Z subgroups C of G such that
Ĉ is not finitely generated.
   The Z e c -collapse of TJSJ , written Te , is the quotient of TJSJ by the
                                           Z
smallest equivalence relation such that for vertices v, w of TJSJ , v ∼ w
if Gv ∩ Gw ∈ Z    e c . Equivalently, the tree Te is the G-tree constructed
                                                 Z
from TJSJ as follows: For all elementary vertices v of TJSJ such that
Ĝv is non-cyclic, collapse the subgraph of TJSJ consisting of v and all
adjacent edges and their endpoints (i.e. the star of v) to a single point.
As orbits of vertices have conjugate vertex groups we have Ĝv ∼      = Ĝg·v
for all g ∈ G, so if v is collapsed in this way then so is every vertex in
its orbit, and so TZe is a G-tree, and hence a Z-tree.
                                                  e      We also see that TZe
inherits the bipartite structure from TJSJ . Since the action G ↷ TJSJ is
minimal, the action G ↷ TZe is also minimal, and the first description
of TZe gives us that, because TJSJ is canonical, the tree TZe is canonical.
Lemma 2.1. Let G be a finitely generated one-ended CSAQ group
whose JSJ-tree has no flexible vertices. Then the Z  e c -collapse Te of
                                                                     Z
the cyclic collapsed tree of cylinders TJSJ of G is a canonical Z-JSJ
                                                                   e
tree of G, and has no flexible vertices.
Proof. We first prove that TZe is universally Z-elliptic.
                                               e          The collapsing
used to get from TJSJ to TZe reduces the set of edge stabilisers, but does
not add any new edge stabilisers, and so edge stabilisers of TZe are edge
   JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 13

stabilisers of TJSJ . As TJSJ is universally Z-elliptic, its edge stabilisers
are universally Z-elliptic, and hence the edge stabilisers of TZe are also
universally Z-elliptic. As every Z-treee      is a Z-tree, and as TZe is a Z-tree,
                                                                            e
it follows that the edge stabilisers of TZe are universally Z-elliptic,
                                                                   e               as
claimed.
   We now prove that vertex groups of non-elementary vertices of TZe
are universally Z-elliptic,
                   e           i.e. non-elementary vertices are rigid. So con-
sider a Z-tree S, and let v be a non-elementary vertex of TZe . As TZe is
           e
constructed from TJSJ by collapsing stars of Z        e c elementary vertices to
single points, the subgroup Gv acts on TJSJ so that there is a minimal
                           (v)
Gv -invariant subtree TJSJ with vertex (resp. edge) stabilisers which are
themselves vertex (resp. edge) stabilisers in the action on G on TJSJ (as
opposed to subgroups of vertex, resp. edge, stabilisers), and with an in-
herited bipartite structure of elementary and non-elementary vertices.
                                                                            (v)
Therefore, all elementary vertex stabilisers in the action Gv ↷ TJSJ are
in Ze c , and all non-elementary vertex stabilisers are universally elliptic
(as they are rigid in the action of G on the JSJ tree TJSJ ). Suppose
                                                                        (v)
Gvi is a non-elementary vertex group of the action Gv ↷ TJSJ . Then
Gvi is universally elliptic, and hence universally Z-elliptic,
                                                            e          and so el-
liptic in the Z-tree S. Suppose Gvi is an elementary vertex group of
                 e
                       (v)
the action Gv ↷ TJSJ . Now let ej be an edge with ι(ej ) = vi . As TJSJ
is universally elliptic, and as Gej is an edge stabiliser of TJSJ , we have
that Gej is elliptic in S, i.e. fixes a point of S. As Gvi is cyclic with
generator x such that xn fixes a point of S for some n ⩾ 1 (specifically,
Gej = ⟨xn ⟩), we have that Gvi is elliptic in S [Ser03, Proposition 25].
As S is a Z-tree
             e       but Gvi is not a Z  e subgroup, Gv in fact fixes a unique
                                                          i
                                                                                  (v)
vertex of S. Therefore, every vertex group Gvi in the action Gv ↷ TJSJ
fixes a vertex of S. On the other hand, none of these groups Gvi are
in Z,
    e but S is a Z-tree,
                      e         so no vertex group Gvi fixes an edge of S.
Now suppose Gvi and Gvj are adjacent vertices in the graph of groups
                                                              (v)
decomposition of Gv corresponding to its action on TJSJ . Then Gvi and
Gvj fix vertices wi , wj of S respectively, and the intersection Gvi ∩ Gvj
fixes the geodesic [wi , wj ]. However, as one of Gvi or Gvj is in Z        e c , we
have that Gvi ∩ Gvj is in Z    e c , and hence is not an edge stabiliser of the
Z-tree
e         S. It follows that wi = wj , and inductively we see that each Gvi
fixes the same point of S, and hence Gv is elliptic in S as required.
   Finally, we prove that TZe dominates every other universally Z-elliptic
                                                                         e
tree S. The collapsing used to get from TJSJ to TZe reduces the set of
14         GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

elementary vertex groups, but does not add any new elementary vertex
groups, and so elementary vertex groups of TZe are elementary vertex
groups of TJSJ . As S is a Z-tree,
                            e       it is a Z-tree, and so is dominated
by TJSJ . Therefore, the elementary vertex groups of TJSJ are elliptic in
S, and hence the elementary vertex groups of TZe are also elliptic in S.
For non-elementary vertices, note that their stabilisers are rigid, and
so are elliptic in every Z-tree,
                         e       and hence are elliptic in S. It follows
that TZe dominates S, as required.                                     □

The Zmax -fold of TZe . We now define the Zmax -fold of TZe , written
TZmax , which is the tree we require for the rest of this paper; under
our assumptions, it is a canonical Zmax -JSJ tree and has no flexible
vertices.
   Given two distinct edges e1 , e2 of a tree S such that ι(e1 ) = ι(e2 ), we
can fold these edges together by identifying τ (e1 ) with τ (e2 ), e1 with e2 ,
and the reverse edge e1 with e2 , and we obtain a new tree S/[e1 = e2 ].
If G acts on S and E ⊂ E(S) is some set of edges of S with the same
initial vertex then an orbit-fold of the edges E is the tree S/[G ↷ E]
obtained by folding together all the edges in g · E for every g ∈ G. This
ensures that G acts on the new tree S/[G ↷ E].
   Let TZe′ be the quotient of TZe by the smallest equivalence relation such
that, for all edges e of TZe and all h ∈ Ĝe , we have h · e ∼ e. We shall
use a constructive definition of TZe′ , which is equivalent [GL17, Proof
of Lemma 9.27] (see also [DG11, Section 4.3]). The tree TZe′ is the G-
tree constructed from TZe by iteratively orbit-folding together edges as
follows: Let e be an edge such that Ge ̸= Ĝe . If one of the endpoints
of e is fixed by Ĝe , then orbit-fold together the set of edges in the
Ĝe -orbit of e. If not, then as Ĝe is cyclic with generator x, say, such
that xn fixes an edge for some n ⩾ 1 (specifically, Ge = ⟨xn ⟩), we have
that the subtree Fix(Ĝe ) fixed by Ĝe is non-empty [Ser03, Proposition
25]. Let e′ be the first edge in the shortest path joining Fix(Ĝe ) to e,
so ι(e′ ) ∈ Fix(Ĝe ) but τ (e′ ) ̸∈ Fix(Ĝe ). Then orbit-fold together the
set of edges in the Ĝe′ -orbit of e′ . The first description of TZe′ gives us
that, because TZe is canonical, the tree TZe′ is canonical. The second
description of TZe′ gives us that the edge stabilisers of TZe′ are contained
in the set {Ĝe | e ∈ E(TZe )}, i.e. are Zmax -subgroups which contain an
edge stabiliser of TZe , and so TZe′ is a Zmax -tree. The Zmax -fold of TZe ,
written TZmax , is the minimal G-invariant subtree of TZe′ ; this tree is
again both canonical and a Zmax -tree.
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 15

Lemma 2.2. Let G be a finitely generated one-ended CSAQ group
whose JSJ trees have no flexible vertices. Then the Zmax -fold TZmax
of TZe is a canonical Zmax -JSJ tree of G, and has no flexible vertices.
Proof. We first prove that TZmax is universally Zmax -elliptic. Recall
that edge stabilisers of TZe′ , and hence of TZmax , are contained in the set
{Ĝe | e ∈ E(TZe )}. So, let Gf be an edge stabiliser of TZmax , so Gf = Ĝe
for some e ∈ E(TZe ), and let S be an arbitrary Zmax -tree of G. Note
that S is also a Z-tree
                      e     of G, as Zmax subgroups are also Z. e As Te is
                                                                         Z
universally Z-elliptic,
                e          Ge is universally Z-elliptic,
                                              e          and hence Ge fixes
some point p of S. As S is a Zmax -tree, and as Ĝe is the unique Zmax -
subgroup of G containing Ge , it follows that Ĝe also fixes the point p
of S. As the edge f ∈ E(TZmax ) and the Zmax -tree S were arbitrary, we
have that TZmax is universally Zmax -elliptic, as claimed.
   We now prove that vertex groups of non-elementary vertices of TZmax
are elliptic in every Zmax -tree S, i.e. non-elementary vertices are rigid.
As above, note that S is also a Z-tree
                                    e      of G. Let v be a non-elementary
vertex of TZmax . Then there exists a non-elementary vertex w in TZe and
edges f1 , . . . , fm adjacent to w such that Gv has stabiliser a multiple
amalgam Gv = Gw (∗Gfi Ĝfi )m    i=1 [DG11, Lemma 4.10]. By Lemma 2.1,
w is a rigid vertex of TZe , and so Gw is elliptic in the Z-tree
                                                           e     S. Now, as
S is a Zmax -tree, for each edge fi adjacent to w the subgroup Ĝfi must
fix the same points as Gfi , and so as Gw is elliptic we also have that
Gv is elliptic. As S is an arbitrary Zmax -tree, v is rigid as required.
   Finally, we prove that TZmax dominates every other universally Zmax -
elliptic tree S. Let v be a vertex of TZmax . Suppose v is elementary.
Then any edge f ∈ E(TZmax ) adjacent to v satisfies Gf ⩽ Gv and
Ĝf = Ĝv . Therefore, as Gf = Ĝf because TZmax is a Zmax -tree, we have
that Gv = Gf . As TZmax is universally Zmax -elliptic, Gv = Gf is elliptic
in every Zmax -tree, and hence in every universally Zmax -elliptic tree, as
required for domination. Suppose v is non-elementary. Then v is rigid,
and so is elliptic in every Zmax -tree, and hence in every universally
Zmax -elliptic tree, as required for domination.                           □

2.1.2. Uniqueness of deformation space. JSJ trees or Zmax -JSJ trees
are not in general unique, but instead unique up to certain moves.
More formally: The deformation space of a tree T is the set of trees T ′
such that T dominates T ′ and T ′ dominates T . Equivalently, two trees
are in the same deformation space if and only if they have the same
elliptic subgroups. Elements of a deformation space are connected by
moves of a certain type [GL17, Remark 2.13] [CF09, Theorem 1.1].
16        GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

Therefore, the following says that Zmax -JSJ decompositions of a CSAQ
group are unique, up to the moves cited above. The proof is clear
because, by the definition of Zmax -JSJ trees, they pairwise dominate
one another and so all lie in the same deformation space.

Proposition 2.3. Let G be a finitely generated one-ended CSAQ group.
If G has a Zmax -JSJ tree, then all Zmax -JSJ trees of G lie in the same
deformation space DZmax .

2.2. Two-generated groups. We now apply the above results and
discussions to the Zmax -JSJ decompositions of one-ended two-generator
CSAQ groups. In particular, we prove both existence and uniqueness of
Zmax -JSJ decomposition for these groups, and classify their structure
(see Proposition 2.7). This lets us define, in Convention 2.8, the Zmax -
JSJ decomposition of a one-ended two-generator CSAQ group, and of a
two-generator one-relator group with torsion. Theorem 2.9 then allows
us to readily determine if a given splitting is, in fact, the Zmax -JSJ
decomposition of such a CSAQ group.

Existence. We prove existence of Zmax -JSJ decompositions by apply-
ing Lemma 2.2 to the following lemma. The proof of the lemma uses
the canonical JSJ tree T of G [GL17, Theorem 9.5] which we previously
used in the proof of Lemma 2.2. However, here we have no restriction
on flexible vertices so our description changes slightly: The canonical
JSJ tree T is a bipartite tree with vertex set V0 (T )⊔V1 (T ), where V0 (T )
consists of rigid and flexible vertices, and V1 (T ) consists of elementary
vertices.

Lemma 2.4. Let G be a one-ended two-generator CSAQ group. Then
no JSJ tree of G has a flexible vertex.

Proof. As G is CSAQ , it has a (canonical) JSJ tree T [GL17, Theorem
9.5]. This tree can be altered to give a new tree T c which has no
elementary vertices: on the level of T /G, for each elementary vertex
v pick an incident edge e and collapse the subgraph (v, e, τ (e)) to a
point. The quotient graph T c /G either consists of a single vertex and
no edges, or a single vertex and a single loop edge [GKL21, Corollary
8.6].
   Then by reversing the above moves, and using the bipartite structure
of T , we have that T /G consists of a single non-elementary vertex v,
possibly an elementary vertex u with incident edges e, f each connected
to v (this corresponds to the loop edge), and possibly some elementary
vertices of degree one each connected to v.
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 17

   It follows that the vertex group Gv is one-ended and two-generated
[GKL21, Propositions 8.1 and 8.3] (we apply one of these citations
for each elementary vertex). Suppose v is flexible. Then Gv is the
fundamental group of a compact surface [GL17, Theorem 9.5]. It fol-
lows that Gv must contain Z2 (for example because such groups are
Fuchsian and by applying the classification of two-generated Fuchsian
groups [Ros86, Lemma 1]), which contradicts G being CSAQ . There-
fore, T does not have a flexible vertex.
   The result now follows as, by Proposition 2.3, any JSJ-tree has the
same elliptic subgroups as T , so has a flexible vertex if and only if T
has a flexible vertex.                                                 □
  We now summarise what we know so far, whilst replacing the Zmax
notation with the Zmax notation. For torsion-free hyperbolic groups,
the first paragraph of this proposition is standard, while the second is
due to Kapovich and Weidmann [KW99a, Proof of Theorem 3.11].
Proposition 2.5. Let G be a one-ended two-generator CSAQ group.
Then G has a canonical Zmax -JSJ tree TZmax , and all Zmax -JSJ trees
of G lie in the same deformation space DZmax .
   Moreover, no Zmax -JSJ tree of G has a flexible vertex.
Proof. By Lemma 2.4, we can apply Lemma 2.2 to get a canonical
Zmax -JSJ tree TZmax for G, and this tree has no flexible vertices. The
result then follows by Proposition 2.3, and because one Zmax -JSJ tree
has a flexible vertex if and only if they all have a flexible vertex. □

Uniqueness and structure. We therefore have a unique deforma-
tion space of Zmax -JSJ trees, but we wish to strengthen this to obtain
uniqueness of trees. To do this, we require an additional property.
   An essential Zmax -tree is a Zmax -tree such that no edge group has fi-
nite index in an adjacent vertex group, while an essential Zmax -splitting
of a group is a corresponding graph of groups decomposition. We de-
fine essential Z-trees and essential Z-splittings analogously, for Z-trees.
We now prove Proposition 2.7, which says that essential Zmax -trees are
unique for our groups. Note that a Zmax -JSJ decomposition with no
elementary vertices is an essential Zmax -splitting.
   The following says that (up to conjugation), there is a single essential
Zmax -tree of G, and that this is a Zmax -JSJ tree of G. This uniqueness is
unusual, and is obtained by a result of Levitt on reduced trees, which
are trees S where if an edge e has the same stabiliser as one of its
endpoints, then both endpoints of e are in the same G-orbit of S, i.e.
e projects onto a loop in the quotient graph S/G [Lev05b, Theorem 1]
18          GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

(see also [DG11, Theorem 5.13] for hyperbolic groups). If G contains
no Z2 subgroups (e.g. is a hyperbolic or CSAQ group), a Zmax -tree S
of G is reduced if and only if it is essential; an essential tree has no
elementary vertices so is necessarily reduced, while if S is a reduced
non-essential Zmax -tree then T /G contains a loop edge with endpoints
an elementary vertex, which by maximality of the edge groups gives a
Z2 subgroup of G.
   We now give the specific form of Levitt’s result we will use, which
assumes malnormal edge stabilisers; this assumption holds for CSAQ
groups, and for one-relator groups with torsion. A G-tree T is rigid if
it is the unique reduced tree in its deformation space.
Lemma 2.6. Suppose T is a reduced G-tree such that the quotient
graph T /G consists of a single vertex with a single loop edge. Sup-
pose moreover G is not an ascending HNN-extension, and that edge
stablisers are malnormal in G. Then T is rigid.
Proof. Suppose that g ∈ G fixes a two-edge path p = (v0 , e, v1 , f, v2 ) of
T . Then g ∈ Ge ∩ Gf . Assume that g is non-trivial. As T /G has only
one edge, there exists an element x ∈ G which takes f to either e or
the reverse edge e. Observing that Ge = Ge yields
                          Ge = Gxf = x−1 Gf x,
and so g ∈ Gf ∩ x−1 Gf x. By malnormality of edge stabilisers, we have
that x ∈ Gf , and so f = e. As p is assumed to be a reduced path, this
is a contradiction. Therefore, we conclude that no non-trivial element
g ∈ G fixes a reduced two-edge path p of T .
   Let v be a vertex of T and e, f be edges with ι(e) = v = ι(f ). By
the above paragraph, Ge ∩ Gf is trivial. Therefore, for all v ∈ V (T ),
there are no edges e, f ∈ E(T ) such that ι(e) = v = ι(f ) and Ge ⩽ Gf ,
and so T is rigid [Lev05b, Theorem 1].                               □
     We are now able to prove our main uniqueness result:
Proposition 2.7. Let G be a one-ended two-generator CSAQ group,
or a one-ended two-generator one-relator group with torsion which is
not isomorphic to ⟨a, b | [a, b]n ⟩ for any n > 1.
  If G has an essential Zmax -tree T which contains at least one edge,
then this tree is unique and is a Zmax -JSJ tree of G. The Zmax -JSJ
decomposition T /G consists of a single rigid vertex with a single loop
edge.
Proof. Let T be as in the statement. If G is a one-relator group with
torsion then every Zmax -subgroup is infinite cyclic [KS71, Č71], and so
every edge group of T is infinite cyclic. Recall from Proposition 2.5 that
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 19

if G is a CSAQ group then no Zmax -JSJ tree of G has a flexible vertex.
The same is true if G is a one-relator group with torsion, as here Out(G)
is virtually-Z [Log16b, Theorem A], but if T has a flexible vertex then
there exists a Z-tree T ′ such that the quotient graph T ′ /G has two
edges, and so Out(G) contains a Z2 subgroup [Lev05a, Proposition
3.1.], and so is not virtually cyclic, a contradiction.
   We first prove that T /G consists of a single vertex v and a single loop
edge. If G is a CSAQ group then this is known [GKL21, Corollary 8.6],
so suppose G is a two-generator one-relator groups with torsion. Here,
Out(G) is virtually-Z [Log16b, Theorem A], and as noted above every
Zmax -splitting is a Z-splitting. If T /G contains more than one edge then
Out(G) is not virtually-Z [Lev05a, Proposition 3.1.], a contradiction.
Hence, T /G contains at most one edge. If it contained more than one
vertex then G would decompose as H ∗c K with C ∼       = Z and H, K ̸∼= Z,
but this is not possible, as explained in the third paragraph of the proof
of Lemma 5.1 of [Log16b]. Hence, T /G consists of a single rigid vertex
with a single loop edge.
   Recall from the preamble that T is reduced. As T is a Zmax tree,
edge stabilisers are malnormal, and so by Lemma 2.6 T is rigid. As
T was an arbitrary essential Zmax tree, we further have that T is the
unique essential tree in its deformation space.
   We now prove that the tree T is a Zmax -JSJ tree. Let TZmax be the
canonical Zmax -JSJ tree guaranteed to exist either by Proposition 2.5,
if G is CSAQ , or by existing theory otherwise [GL17, Proposition 9.30].
As every vertex of T is rigid, every vertex stabiliser Gv , v ∈ V (T ),
is universally Zmax -elliptic, and hence elliptic in TZmax . Therefore, T
dominates TZmax . As TZmax dominates every universally Zmax -elliptic
tree, it follows that T also dominates every universally Zmax -elliptic
tree. To see that T is a universally Zmax -elliptic tree, consider again
the tree TZmax . As this is a Zmax -tree, if e is an edge incident to an
elementary vertex v of TZmax then Ge = Gv . Therefore, we can slide an
orbit of elementary vertices of TZmax into an orbit of adjacent vertices
(so on the level of TZmax /G, slide a single elementary vertex into an
adjacent vertex), and the resulting tree is still a Zmax -JSJ tree of G,
and has the same non-elementary vertex stabilisers as TZmax . As there
are finitely many orbits of elementary vertices of TZmax , this process
terminates at an essential Zmax tree S (essential as it has no elemen-
tary vertices). As TZmax is universally Zmax -elliptic and as S has vertex
stabilisers precisely the non-elementary vertex stabilisers of TZmax , we
have that S is also universally Zmax -elliptic. There are then two op-
tions: either S/G consists of a single rigid vertex, or S/G contains at
least one edge. If S/G consists of a single rigid vertex then the whole
20        GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

group G is elliptic in every Zmax -splitting of G, and therefore G has no
Zmax -splittings, contradicting the existence of the Zmax -tree T which
has an edge. Therefore, S contains an edge, so is as in the statement,
and so by the above S/G consists of a single rigid vertex and a single
loop edge. As S is universally-Zmax elliptic, it is elliptic with respect
to T , and so there exists a tree Ŝ (called a “standard refinement” of
S [GL17, Definition 2.5]) such that every edge stabilizer of T contains
an edge stabilizer of Ŝ [GL17, Proposition 2.2.(iii)], and moreover this
tree is itself a Zmax -tree [GL17, Discussion following Definition 9.25].
These facts combine to give us that every edge stabilizer of T is an
edge stabilizer of Ŝ. Now, the tree S can be obtained from Ŝ by col-
lapsing certain edges to points [GL17, Proposition 2.2.1]. This means
that the vertex groups of S have graph-of-groups decompositions com-
ing from their actions on Ŝ, but as the only vertex in S/G is rigid,
these decompositions must be trivial. Since every vertex group of S is
contained in some vertex group of T , we see that the edges collapsed in
this procedure have necessarily the same stabilisers as at least one of
their endpoints, and so the collapsing does not change the set of edge
stabilisers. It follows that edge stabilisers of Ŝ correspond precisely
to edge stabilisers of S. Therefore, every edge stabilizer of T is an
edge stabilizer of S. As S is universally Zmax -elliptic, T is universally
Zmax -elliptic. Hence, T is a Zmax -JSJ tree, as required
   The result now follows, as Zmax -JSJ trees always lie in the same
deformation space (as they dominate one another).                       □


  Fuchsian groups are treated differently in the theory of JSJ decom-
positions. For example, Bowditch excludes these groups from his main
theorem [Bow98, Theorem 0.1]. These groups play a minor role in
this article (the only Fuchsian groups we consider are ⟨a, b | [a, b]n ⟩ for
n > 1), and it is easiest if, similarly to Bowditch, we simply define the
Zmax -JSJ decomposition of such groups to be trivial.

Convention 2.8. Let G be a one-ended two-generator CSAQ group,
or a one-ended two-generator one-relator group with torsion. If G is
isomorphic to ⟨a, b | [a, b]n ⟩ for n > 1, then “the Zmax -JSJ decompo-
sition of G” is the graph of groups consisting a single vertex and no
edges. Otherwise, “the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G” is a Zmax -JSJ
decomposition with no elementary vertices; by Proposition 2.7 this is
unique (up to conjugation).
   Such a group G has trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition if its Zmax -JSJ
decomposition (as above) consists of a single vertex and no edges.
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 21



Spotting Zmax -JSJ decompositions. Our next result is only for
CSAQ groups; the analogous result for one-relator groups with torsion
has a stronger statement bespoke for one-relator groups, so we post-
pone it until the next section. These results give conditions which are
equivalent to one of our groups having non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decompo-
sition, and these conditions work well with algorithms. In particular,
algorithms can easily detect Conditions (2) and (3) of the following
theorem, and hence can detect a non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition,
while crucially Condition (4) says that Condition (3) actually finds,
rather than just detects, the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G.
Theorem 2.9. Let G be a one-ended two-generator CSAQ group with
Z2 abelianisation. The following are equivalent.
   (1) G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition.
   (2) G has an essential Z-splitting.
   (3) G admits a presentation ⟨a, b | t(a, b−1 ab)⟩ for some subset
       t(a, y) ⊂ F (a, y).
   (4) G has Zmax -JSJ decomposition with a single rigid vertex and a
       single loop edge, corresponding to an HNN-extension with stable
       letter b:
                       ⟨a, y, b | t(a, y), y = b−1 ab⟩
       for some subset t(a, y) ⊂ F (a, y).
Moreover, the presentations in (3) and (4) are related in the obvious
way, so in each presentation the letters a, b represent the same group
elements of G and the subsets t(a, y) are the same subsets of F (a, y).
Proof. We first prove the chain of implications (4) ⇒ (2) ⇒ (1) ⇒ (4).
(4) ⇒ (2) The splitting given by (4) is a Z-splitting, and is essential as
the base group H = ⟨a, y⟩ of the HNN-extension is not virtually-cyclic
as it is one-ended [GKL21, Proposition 8.3].
(2) ⇒ (1) If G has an essential Z-splitting then G is not universally
Zmax -elliptic, i.e. the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G does not consist of
a single rigid vertex with no edges. By Proposition 2.5, the Zmax -JSJ
decomposition of G does not consist of a single flexible vertex with
no edges. Thus, the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G has an edge, as
required.
(1) ⇒ (4) By Proposition 2.7, the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G consists
of a single rigid vertex v and a single loop edge e, as claimed. This
corresponds to an HNN-extension ⟨H, t | t−1 pn t = q m ⟩ where ⟨p⟩ and
⟨q⟩ are maximal cyclic in G. As this is a Zmax -JSJ decomposition
22          GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

we have |m| = |n| = 1, so without loss of generality we may assume
m = n = 1. Now, there exists some h ∈ H such that G = ⟨th, p⟩
and H = ⟨p, h−1 qh⟩ [GKL21, Proposition 8.3], and so by taking a = p,
b = th and y = h−1 qh we obtain the following presentation for G, as
an HNN-extension with stable letter b:
                        ⟨a, y, b | t(a, y), y = b−1 ab⟩
This still corresponds to the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G as the Bass–
Serre tree is the same for the two HNN-extensions, and this tree is
precisely the Zmax -JSJ tree. Hence, (4) holds.
     Finally we prove (4) ⇔ (3).
(3) ⇒ (4) First, apply the Tietze transformation corresponding to
adding the new generator y as b−1 ab to get from the presentation in
(3) to the presentation in (4):
            ⟨a, b | t(a, b−1 ab)⟩ ∼
                                  = ⟨a, y, b | t(a, y), y = b−1 ab⟩.
As G has Z2 abelianisation, both the subgroups ⟨a⟩ and ⟨y⟩ are maximal
infinite cyclic subgroups of G. Therefore, the resulting presentation
describes an HNN-extension, with base group H = ⟨a, y | t(a, y)⟩ and
stable letter b, as claimed. Now, this HNN-extension corresponds to
some essential Z-splitting, because H is one-ended as G is one-ended
[GKL21, Proposition 8.3], and so by Proposition 2.7 the vertex is rigid
and this splitting is in fact the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G. Hence,
(4) holds.
(4) ⇒ (3) This is obvious, by reversing the Tietze transformation from
the above equivalence.                                               □

               3. One-relator groups with torsion
   Recall that a one relator group with torsion is a group given by a
presentation ⟨x | S n ⟩ where n > 1; such groups are always hyper-
bolic, and so when they are one-ended we can discuss their Zmax -JSJ
decompositions.
   In this section we prove Theorem B; we also prove a result about
the automorphic orbits of elements in the subgroup ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ which is
used in the proofs of both Theorems A and B.
   Zmax -JSJ decompositions are only defined for one-ended groups and
Fuchsian groups must be treated with care in JSJ theory (see Conven-
tion 2.8 and the discussion preceding it). The following classification
of when two-generator one-relator groups are one-ended and are Fuch-
sian is therefore useful. Recall that a primitive element of F (a, b) is
   JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 23

an element which is part of a basis for F (a, b). We say a free product
A ∗ B is trivial if either A or B is trivial, and is non-trivial otherwise.
Proposition 3.1. The group defined by ⟨a, b | S n ⟩, n ≥ 1 maximal, is:
  (1) one-ended if and only if S is non-primitive and non-trivial.
  (2) one-ended and Fuchsian if and only if n > 1 and S is conjugate
      to [a, b]±1 .
Proof. Let G = ⟨a, b | S n ⟩, n ≥ 1 maximal.
   For (1), if S is trivial then G is free and so not one-ended, while if
S is primitive then G ∼    = ⟨a, b | an ⟩, so G is either two-ended (if n = 1)
or infinitely ended (if n > 1). Hence, if G is one-ended then S is non-
primitive and non-trivial. For the other direction, if S is non-primitive
and non-trivial then the group G1 defined by ⟨a, b | S⟩ does not split
non-trivially as a free product [LS77, Proposition II.5.13] and is not
cyclic [LS77, Proposition II.5.11], but is torsion-free [LS77, Proposition
II.5.18]. Hence, G1 is one-ended, and so also G is one-ended [Log16a,
Lemma 3.2].
   For (2), the group G is one-ended and Fuchsian if and only if n > 1
and G ∼ = ⟨a, b | [a, b]n ⟩ [Ros86, Lemma 1], if and only if there exists an
automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(F (a, b)) such that ϕ(S n ) = [a, b]±n [Pri77], if
and only if S is conjugate to [a, b]±1 [MKS04, Theorem 3.9], as required.
                                                                            □
   Next we prove the analogue of Theorem 2.9 for two-generator one-
relator groups with torsion. The main differences is that the set t(a, y)
is replaced with a single word T (a, y)n , and that Condition (3) gives
information about this word. The restrictions on the word S in this
theorem correspond precisely to G being one-ended and non-Fuchsian,
by Proposition 3.1. In the theorem, the pair of letters (a, b) in (4) and
(5) represent the same pair of group elements of G. However, the pair
(a, b) from P are different, and are related to those in (4) and (5) via
the map ψ.
Theorem 3.2. Let G be a group admitting a two-generator one-relator
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ where R = S n with n > 1 maximal and
where S ∈ F (a, b) is non-trivial, non-primitive, and not conjugate to
[a, b]±1 . The following are equivalent.
     (1) G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition.
     (2) G has an essential Z-splitting.
     (3) There exists an automorphism ψ ∈ Aut(F (a, b)) such that ψ(S) ∈
          ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩.
     (4) G admits a presentation ⟨a, b | T (a, b−1 ab)n ⟩ for some word
          T ∈ F (a, y).
24          GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

    (5) G has Zmax -JSJ decomposition with a single rigid vertex and a
        single loop edge, corresponding to an HNN-extension with stable
        letter b:
                       ⟨a, y, b | T (a, y)n , y = b−1 ab⟩
Moreover, the presentations in (4) and (5) are related in the obvious
way, so in each presentation the letters a, b represent the same elements
of G and the words T (a, y) are the same, and indeed may be taken to
be such that T (a, b−1 ab) = ψ(S), with ψ as in (3).
Proof. We start with (3) ⇔ (4).
(3) ⇒ (4) It is a standard result in the theory of group presentations
that ⟨a, b | S n ⟩ ∼
                   = ⟨a, b | ψ(S n )⟩, so the result follows by taking T (a, y) ∈
F (a, y) such that T (a, b−1 ab) = ψ(S).
(4) ⇒ (3) This holds as the word S ′ := T (a, b−1 ab) ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ is in
the Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of S [Pri77], as required.
     Finally we prove (5) ⇒ (1) ⇒ (2) ⇒ (4) ⇒ (5).
(5) ⇒ (1) This is clear as the stated Zmax -JSJ decomposition is non-
trivial.
(1) ⇒ (2) This is immediate from the definitions (see Convention 2.8).
(2) ⇒ (4) Suppose G has an essential Z-splitting. Then G has infinite
outer automorphism group [Lev05a, Theorem 5.1], and so there exists
S ′ ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ such that G ∼
                              = ⟨a, b | S ′ ⟩ [Log16b, Lemma 5.1]. Setting
T (a, y) to be the word such that T (a, b−1 ab) = S ′ gives the result.
(4) ⇒ (5) The group G has presentation
         ⟨a, b | T (a, b−1 ab)n ⟩ ∼
                                  = ⟨a, b, y | T (a, y)n , y = b−1 ab⟩
which has the claimed form. This is an HNN-extension with base group
H = ⟨a, y | T (a, y)n ⟩ and stable letter b as the subgroups ⟨a⟩ and ⟨y⟩
of H are isomorphic, because a, and hence its conjugate y = b−1 ab,
have infinite order in G by the B.B. Newman Spelling Theorem [LS77,
Theorem IV.5.5]. Indeed, G has presentations ⟨a, b | T (a, b−1 ab)n ⟩ and
⟨y, b | T (byb−1 , y)n ⟩, whence it follows that the subgroups ⟨a⟩ and ⟨y⟩
are maximal cyclic subgroups of G [New73, Lemma 2.1].
   Therefore, the HNN-extension describes a graph of groups decompo-
sition Γ of G with a single vertex and a single loop edge, and where the
edge groups are maximal cyclic in G. By Proposition 2.7, the vertex is
rigid and Γ is the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G, as required.           □
  Before proving Theorem 3.4 (which corresponds to Theorem B) we
need the following result about orbits of elements of ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ under
   JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 25

automorphisms of F (a, b). We also use this result in the proof of The-
orem 5.4 (Theorems 3.4 and 5.4 combine to prove Theorem A). For a
letter z ∈ z and a word W ∈ F (z), a z-syllable of W is a maximal
subword of the form z i , i ̸= 0.
Proposition 3.3. Let W ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩. Then there exists a cyclic shift
W ′ of W such that W ′ has shortest length in its Aut(F (a, b))-orbit,
and W ′ ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩.
Proof. For a conjugacy class [U ] of an element U ∈ F (a, b), we write
|[U ]| := min{|V | | V ∈ [U ]}. So |[U ]| is simply the length of U after
cyclic reduction. Therefore, the proposition says in particular that for
W ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩, there is no automorphism α ∈ Aut(F (a, b)) such that
|[α(W )]| < |[W ]|. Clearly the result is true if [W ] contains some power
of a. Therefore, assume that [W ] ∩ ⟨a⟩ = ∅, and suppose that there
exists an automorphism α ∈ Aut(F (a, b)) such that |[α(W )]| < |[W ]|.
We find a contradiction.
   By the “peak reduction” lemma from Whitehead’s algorithm [LS77,
Proposition I.4.20], there exists a Whitehead automorphism β of the
second kind (so a Whitehead automorphism which is not a permutation
of {a, b}±1 ) such that |[β(W )]| < |[W ]|. Writing γb ∈ Aut(F (a, b)) for
conjugation by b, the only four such Whitehead automorphisms which
do not fix [W ] are β1 : a 7→ ab, b 7→ b, β−1 : a 7→ ab−1 , b 7→ b, γb β1 , and
γb β−1 .
   We find a contradiction for the automorphisms β1 and β−1 ; the cases
of γb β1 and γb β−1 follow immediately as [γb β1 (W )] = [β1 (W )] and
[γb β−1 (W )] = [β−1 (W )]. Consider a cyclically reduced conjugate W ′ of
W which begins with a or a−1 and ends with b. Then W ′ ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩,
and we write this word as a reduced word U (a, b−1 ab). Let X, Y
denote the total number of x-terms, y-terms respectively in U (x, y),
and Syl(X), Syl(Y ) the total number of x-syllables, y-syllables respec-
tively in U (x, y). Then |W ′ | = X + Y + 2 Syl(Y ). Now, [β1 (W ′ )] =
[U (ba, ab)] and [β−1 (W ′ )] = [U (ab−1 , b−1 a)], and no free reduction or
cyclic reduction happens when forming U (ba, ab) or U (ab−1 , b−1 a), and
so |[β1 (W ′ )]| = 2X + 2Y = |[β−1 (W ′ )]|. Now, clearly Y ≥ Syl(Y ),
while Syl(X) = Syl(Y ) as U (x, y) starts with an x-syllable and ends
with a y-syllable, by our choice of W ′ , and so X ≥ Syl(Y ). Therefore,
2X + 2Y ≥ X + Y + 2 Syl(Y ). However, by assumption 2X + 2Y <
X + Y + 2 Syl(Y ), so we have our promised contradiction.                     □
  We now prove Theorem B.
Theorem 3.4 (Theorem B). Let G be a group admitting a two-generator
one-relator presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ where R = S n in F (a, b) with
26        GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

n > 1 maximal and where S is non-trivial and not a primitive element
of F (a, b). The following are equivalent.
   (1) G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition.
   (2) There exists a word T of shortest length in the Aut(F (a, b))-
        orbit of S such that T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ but T is not conjugate to
        [a, b]±1 .
Proof. Suppose (1) holds. Then G is not Fuchsian and so, by Propo-
sition 3.1, S is not conjugate to [a, b]±1 . Then by Theorem 3.2 there
exists an automorphism ψ ∈ Aut(F (a, b)) such that ψ(S) ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩.
By Proposition 3.3, there exists a cyclic shift T of ψ(S) which has
shortest length in its Aut(F (a, b))-orbit, and T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩. Moreover,
as S is not conjugate to [a, b]±1 , neither is T [MKS04, Theorem 3.9].
Hence, the word T satisfies (2).
   If (2) holds then (1) follows from Theorem 3.2.                      □
        4. Splittings and Friedl–Tillmann polytopes
  Theorem 2.9 gives a clear link between Zmax -JSJ decompositions
and presentations of the form P ′ = ⟨x, y | t(x, y −1 xy)⟩ for subsets
t(x, y −1 xy) of ⟨x, y −1 xy⟩. In this section we suppose that this JSJ-
presentation P ′ for a group G is “close” to being one-relator (specifi-
cally, the generating pair (x, y) also admits a one-relator presentation
⟨x, y | S⟩), and we prove that the Friedl–Tillmann polytope of G is
a straight line (Theorem 4.1), and hence that any one-relator presen-
tation for G has this JSJ-form ⟨a, b | R0 (a, b−1 ab)⟩, up to a Nielsen
transformation (Lemma 4.2).
  In Section 5 we prove that Theorem 4.1 applies to CSAQ groups,
and hence to torsion-free hyperbolic groups. The proof of Theorem 4.2
reviews the notion of a Friedl–Tillmann polytope.
Theorem 4.1. Let G be a torsion-free two-generator one-relator group
with Z2 abelianisation, and let P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ be any one-relator pre-
sentation of G. Suppose there exists a normal subgroup N of F (x, y)
such that:
   (1) F (x, y)/N ∼
                  = G,
   (2) N can be normally generated by a single element RN ∈ F (x, y),
   (3) There exists a subset tN of ⟨x, y −1 xy⟩ such that tN normally
        generates N .
Then the Friedl–Tillmann polytope FT of P is a straight line.
Proof. Let X denote the Cayley 2-complex associated to the one-relator
presentation ⟨x, y | RN ⟩ of G. Since G is torsion-free, X is aspherical
[Lyn50]. As G is finitely presentable, there exists a finite subset t′N
   JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 27

of tN which also normally generates N . Therefore, G admits a finite
presentation
                         ⟨x, y | t′N (x, y −1 xy), RN ⟩,
and let Y be the Cayley 2-complex of this presentation. Note that X
is a subcomplex of Y . Moreover, since every relator r in t′N (x, y −1 xy)
corresponds to a closed loop γr in X, we can form a 3-complex Z from
Y by G-equivariantly gluing in 3-cells, one G orbit for each element
in t′N (x, y −1 xy), in such a way that the boundary of the 3-cell is the
union of two 2-discs glued along their boundary, where the first disc
fills in the relator r in Y , and the second fills in the loop γr in X. It is
clear that Z is a 3-dimensional cofinite G-complex which retracts onto
X, and hence is aspherical.
    We will now use Z, together with the fact that G satisfies the Atiyah
conjecture [JZLA20] and that it is L2 -acyclic [DL07], and compute the
L2 -torsion polytope P (2) (G) of G, as defined by Friedl–Lück [FL17].
Note that, in general, P (2) is not necessarily a polytope, but a formal
difference of two polytopes. Nevertheless, when G is a one-relator group
then P (2) (G) coincides with the Friedl–Tillmann polytope by [FL17,
Remark 5.5], and is a single polytope.
    We start by looking at the cellular chain complex C• of Z. For every
n, the n-chains Cn form a free ZG-module. We pick a natural cellular
basis for C• , namely: the vertex 1 forms the basis for C0 ; the edges
connecting 1 to y and x form the basis of C1 ; the discs filling-in RN
in X and the relators from t′N (x, y −1 xy) in Y form the basis for C2 ;
and finally the 3-cells attached to the basic discs filling-in relators from
t′N (x, y −1 xy) form the basis of C3 .
    We may now identify C• with
                      ZGα → ZGα+1 → ZG2 → ZG
where α = |t′N (x, y −1 xy)|.
   Before proceeding any further, we need to deal with the special case
                             ∂r
in which the Fox derivatives ∂x are zero for all r ∈ t′N (x, y −1 xy). The
fundamental formula of Fox calculus [Fox53] tells us that
                   ∂r           ∂r
                      (1 − x) +    (1 − y) = 1 − r = 0
                   ∂x           ∂y
               ∂r                            ∂r
in ZG. Hence ∂y   (1 − y) = 0, which forces ∂y  = 0, as G satisfies the
Atiyah conjecture and hence ZG has no non-trivial zero divisors. (A
careful reader might observe that for this argument we need y ̸= 1 in
G, which is true since otherwise the abelianisation of G would not be
28        GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

Z2 .) In fact, we can conclude that ZG does not have non-trivial zero-
divisors from an earlier work of Lewin–Lewin [LL78]. Now, since both
Fox derivatives of r vanish, the 1-cycle corresponding to r is trivial.
   Since RN lies in the normal closure of t′N (x, y −1 xy), the 1-cycle given
by RN must also be trivial. Hence, the differential C2 → C1 is zero.
We know that C• is L2 -acyclic. For torsion-free groups satisfying the
Atiyah conjecture, like G, this amounts to saying that D(G) ⊗ZG C•
is acyclic, where D(G) is the Linnell skew-field, a skew-field which
contains ZG. In our case, if the differential C2 → C1 is trivial, then
tensoring C• with D(G) yields the chain
                                                      0
               D(G)α −→ D(G)α+1 −→ D(G)2 −→ D(G)

which cannot be acyclic for dimension reasons. This is a contradiction.
   Let r ∈ t′N (x, y −1 xy) be such that the Fox derivative ∂x
                                                            ∂r
                                                               is not zero.
Let d denote the 2-chain given by the disc filling-in r in Y ; note that
d is a basis element of C2 . We now look at the commutative diagram
with exact columns

                    0                       /0                 /0                   /0


                                                                               
                    0                      / ⟨d⟩              / ZG2            / ZG

                                                                    id                    id
                                                                                   
(†)            ZGα                       / ZGα+1              / ZG2            / ZG

               id
                                                                                   
               ZG               α      / ZGα+1 /⟨d⟩            /0                   /0


                                                                                   
                    0                       /0                 /0                   /0


where ⟨d⟩ denotes the ZG-span of d. Note that (†) is really a short
exact sequence of chain complexes.
  By assumption, the middle row of (†) is L2 -acyclic. We claim that
so is the second row, which we will denote by B• . To prove the claim,
we need to look at the chain complex B• in more detail:
                                                                        
                                       ∂r ∂r 
                                                          
                                                              1−y 
                                       ∂y ∂x /                1−x
                                ⟨d⟩            ZG2                           / ZG
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 29

                                                          ∂r
Since G is not cyclic, we have 1 − y ̸= 0; we also have ∂x   ̸= 0 by
assumption. Now B• fits into the exact sequence of chain complexes
                             0               /0        /0


                                               (1−y) 
                             0              / ZG      / ZG

                                                            id
                                                      
(‡)                      ⟨d⟩                / ZG2    / ZG

                        id
                                    ∂r
                                   ( ∂x )              
                         ⟨d⟩                / ZG       /0


                                                      
                             0               /0        /0

where the middle column represents the inclusion of the first coordinate
into ZG2 and then the projection onto the second coordinate. Since
both horizontal differentials labelled in the diagram are multiplications
by non-zero elements of ZG, they are invertible over D(G), and hence
the second and fourth rows of this commutative diagram are exact
upon tensoring with D(G). By [FL17, Lemma 2.9], the middle row
also becomes exact upon tensoring with D(G). This proves the claim.
   We are now back to examining (†). We have just shown that the
second row is L2 -acyclic, and hence [FL17, Lemma 2.9] tells us that so
is the fourth row, and that
                    P (2) (C• ) = P (2) (B• ) + P (2) (D• )
where D• denotes the fourth row of (†). We can split P (2) (B• ) further
using diagram (‡) and [FL17, Lemma 1.9], and obtain
                                 P (2) (B• ) = P − Q
where −P is the L2 -torsion polytope of
                                             1−y
                                    ZG −→ ZG
and −Q of
                                              ∂r
                                        ∂x
                                    ZG −→  ZG
Now we need to recall how the polytope P (2) is actually constructed,
at least in the above (simple) cases. When considering a chain complex
of the form
                                     z
                               ZG −→ ZG
30        GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

with z ∈ ZG∖{0}, the polytope is obtained by first taking the support
supp(z) ⊆ G, then taking the image of this set in H1 (G; R), and then
taking the convex hull. At the end the polytope is given a sign, negative
in this situation, and in general depending on whether the single non-
trivial differential starts in an even or an odd dimension.
   With the construction in mind, it is now immediate that, since r is
a word in x and y −1 xy, the polytope P is contained within the strip
[−1, 0] × R. The polytope Q is obtained from 1 − y, and hence it is the
segment [0, 1] × {0}.
   Since D• is concentrated around a single differential from odd to
even degree chains, P (2) (D• ) = −R where R is some polytope. Hence
                   P (2) (G) = P (2) (C• ) = P − Q − R
Since G is a one-relator group, P (2) (G) is actually a single polytope.
Hence, in particular, P − Q must be a single polytope, and therefore
it must lie on the line {−1} × R. Subtracting a further polytope from
such a polytope does not alter this fact, and hence we have finished
the proof.                                                            □
  Next, we prove the converse to Theorem 4.1. This is applied to prove
that (3) implies (2) in the proof of Theorem 5.4.
Lemma 4.2. Let G be a group admitting a two-generator one-relator
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ with R ∈ F (a, b)′ \ {1}. The Friedl–
Tillmann polytope of P is a straight line if and only if there exists
a word T of shortest length in the Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of R such that
T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩.
Proof. Suppose that the Friedl–Tillmann polytope is a line. By apply-
ing a suitable Nielsen automorphism, we may assume that G is given
by the presentation ⟨x, y | S⟩ and that the polytope lies on the line
{0} × R.
   To construct the Friedl–Tillmann polytope, we first define an aux-
iliary polytope P by tracing the closed loop the word S gives in the
Cayley graph of the free part of the abelianisation of G taken with
respect to the image of {x, y} as a generating set, and then taking the
convex hull of the image of the loop in H1 (G; R). Then we observe
that P has to be the Minkowski sum of another polytope, say P ′ , and
the square [−1, 0] × [−1, 0]. The polytope P ′ is precisely the Friedl–
Tillmann polytope. Note that the polytope is only well-defined up to
translation, so it does not matter which square we choose. (When G
is torsion-free, the polytope P ′ coincides with the L2 -torsion polytope
constructed above.)
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 31

   Now, we know that P ′ is a line, which forces P to lie inside the strip
[−1, 0]×R. Hence, the loop given by S must also lie in this strip. Since
S ∈ F (x, y)′ , it can be written as a product of right conjugates of x by
powers of y. We now see that the only conjugates of x appearing can
be x and y −1 xy. Therefore, there exists a word T ′ in the Aut(F (a, b))-
orbit of R such that T ′ ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩, and so by Proposition 3.3 there
exists a word T of shortest length in the Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of R with
T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩, as required.
   Now suppose that there exists a word T of shortest length in the
Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of R such that T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩. Then we may assume
that G is given by a presentation ⟨a, b | T ′ ⟩ with T ′ ∈ ⟨a, bab−1 ⟩. It
follows that the loop given by T must lie inside the strip [−1, 0]×R, and
so P also lies inside this strip. As P is the Minkowski sum of P ′ and
the square [−1, 0] × [−1, 0], we see that P ′ is a straight segment.    □
  If the polytope is a single point then the conditions on the relator
are much stronger. We use this lemma in the proof of Theorem A.
Lemma 4.3. Let G be a group admitting a two-generator one-relator
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ with R ∈ F (a, b)′ \ {1}. The Friedl–
Tillmann polytope of P is a point if and only if R is conjugate to [a, b]k
for some k ∈ Z.
Proof. Suppose the Friedl–Tillmann polytope P ′ of P is a point. As
in the proof of Lemma 4.2, we may assume that G is given by the
presentation ⟨x, y | S⟩ and that the polytope lies on the line {0} × R.
As P ′ is a point, the polytope P is the square [0, 1] × [0, 1] (up to
translation). This means precisely that S = [a, b]k for some non-zero
k ∈ Z.
  Now suppose that R is conjugate to [a, b]k for some k ∈ Z. Then we
may assume that G is given by the presentation ⟨a, b | (aba−1 b−1 )k ⟩,
and this presentation is easily seen to have Friedl–Tillmann polytope
a point.                                                             □
                       5. The main theorem
   In this section we prove our main theorem, Theorem A. We require
the results proven in Section 2, which were for CSAQ groups. These
results are applicable to the BS-free one-relator groups of Theorem
A as a torsion-free one-relator group is CSAQ if and only if it is BS-
free [GKL21, Theorem B]. We start with a lemma which allows us to
apply Theorem 4.1.
Lemma 5.1. Let G be a torsion-free BS-free two-generator one-relator
group with Z2 abelianisation. Suppose G admits an HNN-presentation
32         GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

⟨H, t | t−1 pn t = q⟩ where p, q are nontrivial elements of H and the
subgroups ⟨p⟩ and ⟨q⟩ are malnormal in H. Then there exist a normal
subgroup N of F (x, y) such that:
   (1) F (x, y)/N ∼= G,
   (2) N can be normally generated by a single element RN ∈ F (x, y),
   (3) There exists a finite subset tN of ⟨x, y −1 xy⟩ such that tN nor-
        mally generates N .

Proof. Suppose that G admits a one-relator presentation ⟨a, b | R⟩.
   The subgroups ⟨p⟩ and ⟨q⟩ are “conjugacy separated” in H, that
is, for every h ∈ H we have h−1 ⟨p⟩h ∩ ⟨q⟩ = 1. To see this, suppose
otherwise, so h−1 pi h = q j for |i|, |j| > 0. It follows that h−1 pi h =
t−1 pnj t, and as G is CSAQ we have that th−1 and p share a common
power, a contradiction by Britton’s Lemma.
   As ⟨p⟩ and ⟨q⟩ are conjugacy separated in H, there exists a Nielsen
transformation ψ of F (a, b) and some g ∈ G such that ψ(a) =G g −1 pi g
and ψ(b) =G g −1 thg for some i ∈ Z and some h ∈ H [KW99b, Corollary
3.1]. Therefore, writing x := p and y := th, the pair (x, y) generates G.
But also the pair (xi , y) generates G, and as G has abelianisation Z2 we
have that |i| = 1. Note that as the generating pair (a, b) of G admits a
one-relator presentation, and as ψ is a Nielsen transformation, we have
that the pair (x, y) also admits a one-relator presentation ⟨x, y | RN ⟩.
Hence, points (1) and (2) of the theorem hold for some subgroup N ≤
F (x, y).
   We now establish (3) for N ≤ F (x, y). Firstly, note that H =
⟨p, h−1 qh⟩ by [GKL21, Proposition 8.3], and so H has presentation
⟨x, z | s(x, z)⟩ where x := p (as above) and z := h−1 qh. Therefore,
G has presentation ⟨x, z, t | s(x, z), t−1 xn t = w(x, z)zw(x, z)−1 ⟩ where
w(x, z) represents the element h ∈ H. As remarked above the theorem,
because G is finitely presentable we may assume for our purposes with
G (but not H) that the set s(x, z) is finite. As y = th, we can apply
Tietze transformations as follows, where the generators x and y corre-
spond precisely to the generators x and y in the previous paragraph:

     ⟨x, z, t | s(x, z), t−1 xn t = w(x, z)zw−1 (x, z)⟩
      ∼
      = ⟨x, y, z, t | s(x, z), t−1 xn t = w(x, z)zw−1 (x, z), y = tw(x, z)⟩
     ∼
     = ⟨x, y, z, t | s(x, z), y −1 xn y = z, y = tw(x, z)⟩
     ∼
     = ⟨x, y, z | s(x, z), y −1 xn y = z⟩
     ∼
     = ⟨x, y | s(x, y −1 xn y)⟩
     ∼
     = ⟨x, y | tN ⟩
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 33

for some finite subset tN = s(x, y −1 xn y) of ⟨x, y −1 xy⟩. As the symbols
x and y in this presentation of G and the one-relator presentation
⟨x, y | RN ⟩ of G both represent the same elements of G, it follows that
N is the normal closure of the set tN in F (x, y), as required.          □
  Our next result is the torsion-free part of our main theorem. It is
worth stating separately because it does not include the exceptional
cases of points (2) and (3).
Theorem 5.2. Let G be a torsion-free BS-free group admitting a two-
generator one-relator presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ with R ∈ F (a, b)′ \
{1}. The following are equivalent.
   (1) G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition.
   (2) There exists a word T of shortest length in the Aut(F (a, b))-
       orbit of R such that T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩.
   (3) The Friedl–Tillmann polytope of P is a straight line.
Proof. Note that G is one-ended by Proposition 3.1, and is a CSAQ
group. Therefore, Theorem 2.9 is applicable.
  Items (2) and (3) are equivalent by Lemma 4.2.
(2) ⇒ (1) The word T gives a presentation for G:
                    ⟨a, b | T ⟩ = ⟨a, b | T0 (a, b−1 ab)⟩.
Then (1) follows by Theorem 2.9.
(1) ⇒ (3) By Theorem 2.9 the conditions of Lemma 5.1 are satisfied,
so we may apply Theorem 4.1, and (3) follows.                    □
  We wish to combine Theorem 5.2 and Theorem B to prove Theorem
A. However, if R = S n with n > 1 in Theorem A then we cannot
immediately apply Theorem B, as this theorem deals with the root S
rather than the relator R = S n . The following observation is therefore
useful.
Lemma 5.3. If n > 1 and S ∈ F (a, b), then S has shortest length
in its Aut(F (a, b))-orbit if and only if S n has shortest length in its
Aut(F (a, b))-orbit.
Proof. Suppose that α, β ∈ Aut(F (a, b)) are such that α(S) and β(S n )
are shortest-length in their respective Aut(F (a, b))-orbits. In particu-
lar, they are both cyclically reduced and since β(S n ) = β(S)n is cycli-
cally reduced if and only if β(S) is cyclically reduced, we see that
|α(S)n | = n|α(S)| and |β(S)n | = n|β(S)|. Now by the shortest-length
assumptions we have
           |α(S n )| ≥ |β(S n )| = n|β(S)| ≥ n|α(S)| = |α(S n )|
34          GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

so equality holds. The conclusion follows by taking α or β to be the
identity as appropriate.                                          □
     We now combine Theorem 5.2 and Theorem B to prove Theorem A.
Theorem 5.4 (Theorem A). Let G be a BS-free group admitting a two-
generator one-relator presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ with R ∈ F (a, b)′ \
{1}. The following are equivalent.
   (1) G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition.
   (2) There exists a word T of shortest length in the Aut(F (a, b))-
       orbit of R such that T ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ but T is not conjugate to
       [a, b]k for any k ∈ Z.
   (3) The Friedl–Tillmann polytope of P is a straight line, but not a
       single point.
Proof. If there exists a word T in the Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of R which
is conjugate to [a, b]k for some k ∈ Z, then G is either abelian (when
|k| = 1) or contains torsion (when k > 1). Applying this to Lemma
4.3, we also have that if P is a single point then G is either abelian or
contains torsion. Therefore, if G is torsion-free then the result follows
by Theorem 5.2.
   Suppose G contains torsion, so R = S n in F (a, b) for some n > 1
maximal.
(2) ⇔ (3) This follows from Lemmas 4.2 and 4.3.
(1) ⇒ (2) If G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition then, by The-
orem B, there exists a word T ′ of shortest length in the Aut(F (a, b))-
orbit of S such that T ′ ∈ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ but T ′ is not conjugate to [a, b]±1 .
Then the word T := (T ′ )n has shortest length in its Aut(F (a, b))-orbit,
by Lemma 5.3, and hence in the Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of R, is contained
in ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩, and is not conjugate to [a, b]±n (we are using uniqueness
of roots in free groups here). As n is maximal, T is not conjugate to
any other power of [a, b]±1 , and so (2) holds.
(2) ⇒ (1) For T as in (2) , write ψ ∈ Aut(F (a, b)) for the automorphism
such that ψ(R) = T , and set T ′ := ψ(S). Then T ′ has shortest length
in the Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of S, by Lemma 5.3, is in ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩ and is
not conjugate to [a, b]±1 . Therefore, by Theorem B, (1) holds.        □

              6. Consequences of the main theorem
     We now prove Corollaries C–G from the introduction

Forms of Zmax -JSJ decompositions. We first prove Corollary C,
which describes the Zmax -JSJ decompositions of our groups.
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 35

Corollary 6.1 (Corollary C). Let the group G and the presentation
P be as in Theorem A or B, and write R = S n for n ≥ 1 maximal.
Suppose that G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition Γ. Then the
graph underlying Γ consists of a single rigid vertex and a single loop
edge. Moreover, the corresponding HNN-extension has vertex group
⟨a, y | T0n (a, y)⟩, stable letter b, and attaching map given by y = b−1 ab,
where T0 (a, b−1 ab) is the word T from the respective theorem. Finally,
|T0 | < |S|.
Proof. By (2) of Theorem A or B, as appropriate, G admits a presen-
tation of the form ⟨a, b | T0n (a, b−1 ab)⟩, n ≥ 1, where T0n (a, b−1 ab) and
T n (a, b) are the same words. Hence, G has a presentation
                      ⟨a, b, y | T0n (a, y), b−1 ab = y⟩,
which is an HNN-extension with stable letter b, and corresponds to a
graph of groups decomposition Γ as in the statement of the corollary.
This decomposition corresponds to the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G
and has rigid vertex by Theorem 2.9, if G is as in Theorem A, and by
Theorem 3.2 otherwise.
  Finally, as T is not a power of a primitive we have that |T0 | < |T |,
and so |T0 | < |T | ≤ |S|, as required.                              □

Algorithmic consequences. We now prove Corollary D, on comput-
ing Zmax -JSJ decompositions. Note that it is possible to calculate a
precise bound for the time complexity of this algorithm, as the con-
stants are known for the time complexity of Whitehead’s algorithm in
F (a, b) [Kha04] [CR15, Theorem 1.1].
Corollary 6.2 (Corollary D). There exists an algorithm with input a
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ of a group G from Theorem A or B, and
with output the Zmax -JSJ decomposition for G.
  This algorithm terminates in O(|R|2 )-steps.
Proof. Write R as S n with n ≥ 1 maximal. Write OS for the set of
shortest elements in the Aut(F (a, b))-orbit of S.
   Firstly, use Whitehead’s algorithm to compute the set OS ; this takes
O(|S|2 ) ≤ O(|R|2 ) steps [Kha04]. Then compute T := OS ∩ ⟨a, b−1 ab⟩;
Khan gave a linear bound on the cardinality of OS [Kha04] and we
can (constructively) test membership of any fixed finitely generated
subgroup of a free group in time linear in the length of the input word,
so this takes O(|S|2 ) ≤ O(|R|2 ) steps. If the intersection T is empty
then, by Theorem A or B as appropriate, the Zmax -JSJ decomposition
of G is trivial. Therefore, output as the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G
36         GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

the graph of groups consisting of a single vertex, with vertex group G,
and no edges.
   If T is non-empty then take some T ∈ T . Rewrite this word T as
a word T0 (a, b−1 ab); this takes O(|T |) ≤ O(|R|) steps. By Corollary
C, the Zmax -JSJ decomposition of G is the graph of groups with a
single vertex, a single loop edge, vertex group ⟨a, y | T0n (a, y)⟩ and
the attaching map a = byb−1 , and so output this as the Zmax -JSJ
decomposition of G.                                                   □

  We next prove Corollary E, on detecting non-trivial Zmax -JSJ de-
compositions.
Corollary 6.3 (Corollary E). There exists an algorithm with input a
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ of a group G from Theorem A, and with
output yes if the group G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition and
no otherwise.
  This algorithm terminates in O(|R|)-steps.
Proof. We describe an algorithm to decide in O(|R|) steps whether
or not the Friedl–Tillmann polytope is a line; the result then follows
from Theorem A. We need to avoid computing the entire convex hull,
because that cannot in general be done in linear time. Suppose that the
Friedl–Tillmann polytope P is a line, namely from (x0 , y0 ) to (x1 , y1 )
with x0 ≤ x1 . Then the Minkowski sum P ′ of P and [0, 1] × [0, 1] will
be the convex hull of 6 points (with only 4 needed in the vertical or
horizontal case). If y0 ≤ y1 , the points are (x0 + 1, y0 ), (x0 , y0 ), (x0 , y0 +
1) in the bottom left corner and (x1 , y1 + 1), (x1 + 1, y1 + 1), (x1 + 1, y1 )
in the top right corner, and the minimal bounding box (axis-parallel
rectangle) has opposite corners (x0 , y0 ) and (x1 + 1, y1 + 1). If y0 > y1 ,
the minimal bounding box instead has opposite corners (x0 , y0 + 1) and
(x1 + 1, y1 )
   The algorithm proceeds as follows. If necessary, we put the word
into reduced form in linear time using a stack (for each letter, if it
is inverse to the top of the stack then discard it and pop from the
stack, else push it onto the stack). We then determine two candidate
polytopes P0′ and P1′ , each on 6 points, by computing the minimal
bounding box of (the convex hull of) the path γ by walking the path and
keeping track of the minimal and maximal x and y coordinates visited,
then applying the two possibilities for P ′ in terms of the bounding
box discussed in the previous paragraph. It remains to check if the
convex hull of γ is contained in and contains some candidate. For each
candidate, we now walk the path again and check that we stay inside
the polytope (a constant time check, as it is on 6 points) and visit the 6
  JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 37

defining points. If either candidate matches, we have determined that
the Friedl–Tillman polytope is a line, otherwise it is not.        □
   Finally, we prove Corollary F, on determining the commensurability
classes of outer automorphism groups. This result is only applicable
to hyperbolic groups, as it relies on a connection between Zmax -JSJ
decompositions and outer automorphism groups which is only known
for hyperbolic groups.
Corollary 6.4 (Corollary F). There exists an algorithm with input a
presentation P = ⟨a, b | R⟩ of a hyperbolic group G from Theorem
A or B that determines which one of the following three possibilities
holds: the outer automorphism group of G is finite, is virtually Z, or
is isomorphic to GL2 (Z).
   If G is as in Theorem A, this algorithm terminates in O(|R|)-steps.
Else, it terminates in O(|R|2 )-steps.
Proof. If R is conjugate to [a, b]n for some n ∈ Z then Out(G) ∼      =
GL2 (Z) [Log16b, Theorem A]. Else if G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ de-
composition then, by Theorems 2.9 and 3.2, G has an essential Z-
splitting, and so Out(G) is virtually Z [Lev05a, Theorem 5.1]. Else,
by Theorems 2.9 and 3.2, G admits no essential Z-splittings, and so
Out(G) is finite [Lev05a, Theorem 5.1].
   Our algorithm is therefore as follows: Firstly, determine whether
R is conjugate to [a, b]n for some n ∈ Z; this takes O(|R|) steps. If
it is, then Out(G) ∼ = GL2 (Z). Otherwise determine whether G has
trivial Zmax JSJ decomposition; this takes O(|R|) steps if R ∈ F (a, b)′ ,
by Corollary E, and otherwise takes O(|R|2 ) steps, by Corollary D. If
G has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ decomposition Out(G) is virtually Z, else
Out(G) is finite.                                                     □

Relationships between outer automorphism groups. We now
prove Corollary G, on embeddings of outer automorphism groups. As
with the above, this requires the groups involved to be hyperbolic.
Corollary 6.5 (Corollary G). Write Gk for the group defined by ⟨a, b |
S k ⟩, where k ⩾ 1 is maximal. If S ∈ F (a, b)′ \ {1} and G1 is hyperbolic
then:
     (1) Out(Gm ) ∼
                  = Out(Gn ) for all m, n > 1.
     (2) Out(Gn ) embeds with finite index in Out(G1 ).
Proof. We first prove (1). For k > 1, every automorphism ϕ of Gk
is induced by a Nielsen transformation ϕt of F (a, b) [Pri77, Principal
Lemma]. This gives a homomorphism θk : Hk ↠ Out(Gk ) for some
38         GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

subgroup Hk of Out(F (a, b)). Now, such a map ϕt sends S to a con-
jugate of S or of S −1 in F (a, b) [MKS04, Theorem N5], so the maps
are dependent only on the word S, and independent of the exponent
k in S k , and therefore Hm = Hn for all m, n > 1. Moreover, the
maps θk are all isomorphisms [Log16b, Theorem 4.2], and so we have
Out(Gm ) ∼ = Hm = Hn ∼   = Out(Gn ) as required.
   For (2), as we observed in the previous paragraph, the automor-
phisms of Gn depend solely on S and so we have a sequence of homo-
                 θn             ξn
morphisms Hn −→      Out(Gn ) −→ Out(G1 ) where θn is injective (it is an
isomorphism in fact). Then ξn θn is injective, by an identical proof to
the proof that θn is injective [Log16b, Lemma 4.4], and so ξn is injective.
To see that im(ξn ) has finite index in Out(G1 ) note that because G1
is hyperbolic, S is not conjugate to [a, b]±1 , and so G1 has non-trivial
Zmax -JSJ decomposition if and only if Gn has non-trivial Zmax -JSJ de-
composition by Theorems A and B. If both Zmax -JSJ decompositions
are non-trivial then, by Corollary C, both Zmax -JSJ decomposition are
essential Z-splittings consisting of a single rigid vertex with a single loop
edge, and so both Out(G1 ) and Out(Gn ) are virtually Z [Lev05a, The-
orem 5.1], and the result follows. If both Zmax -JSJ decompositions are
trivial then both Out(G1 ) and Out(Gn ) are finite [Lev05a, Theorem
5.1], and the result follows.                                               □

   The above proof uses the fact that S ∈ F (a, b)′ in two places; firstly
to prove that Out(Gn ) embeds in Out(G1 ) (which is hidden in the
citation), and secondly to obtain finite index (by using Theorem A).
If S ̸∈ F (a, b)′ then we can still ask if Out(Gn ) embeds in Out(G1 ).
                                          n  θ              ξn
Indeed, we still obtain a sequence Hn −→     Out(Gn ) −→ Out(G1 ), but
here the proof that θn is injective does not extend to the map ξn θn
[Log16b, Lemma 4.6] (as the proof uses the theory of one-relator groups
with torsion, in the form of a strengthened version of the B.B. Newman
Spelling Theorem). Therefore, we are currently unable to prove that
Out(Gn ) embeds in Out(G1 ) in general.

                                References
[AG99] D. J. Allcock and S. M. Gersten, A homological characterization of hyper-
      bolic groups, Invent. Math. 135 (1999), no. 3, 723–742. MR 1669272
[Bar18] Benjamin Barrett, Computing JSJ decompositions of hyperbolic groups, J.
      Topol. 11 (2018), no. 2, 527–558. MR 3828057
[Bow98] Brian H. Bowditch, Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic
      groups, Acta Math. 180 (1998), no. 2, 145–186. MR 1638764
[CF09] Matt Clay and Max Forester, Whitehead moves for G-trees, Bull. Lond.
      Math. Soc. 41 (2009), no. 2, 205–212. MR 2496498
   JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 39

[CL83] D.J. Collins and F. Levin, Automorphisms and Hopficity of certain
      Baumslag-Solitar groups, Arch. Math. (Basel) 40 (1983), no. 5, 385–400.
      MR 707725
[CR15] Bobbe Cooper and Eric Rowland, Classification of automorphic conjugacy
      classes in the free group on two generators, Algorithmic problems of group
      theory, their complexity, and applications to cryptography, Contemp. Math.,
      vol. 633, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2015, pp. 13–40. MR 3364219
[DG08] François Dahmani and Daniel Groves, The isomorphism problem for toral
      relatively hyperbolic groups, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. (2008),
      no. 107, 211–290. MR 2434694
[DG11] François Dahmani and Vincent Guirardel, The isomorphism problem for
      all hyperbolic groups, Geom. Funct. Anal. 21 (2011), no. 2, 223–300.
      MR 2795509
[DL07] Warren Dicks and Peter A. Linnell, L2 -Betti numbers of one-relator groups,
      Math. Ann. 337 (2007), no. 4, 855–874. MR 2285740
[DT19] François Dahmani and Nicholas Touikan, Deciding isomorphy using Dehn
      fillings, the splitting case, Invent. Math. 215 (2019), no. 1, 81–169.
      MR 3904450
[FL17] Stefan Friedl and Wolfgang Lück, Universal L2 -torsion, polytopes and ap-
      plications to 3-manifolds, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 114 (2017), no. 6,
      1114–1151. MR 3661347
[Fox53] Ralph H. Fox, Free differential calculus. I. Derivation in the free group
      ring, Ann. of Math. (2) 57 (1953), 547–560. MR 53938
[FT20] Stefan Friedl and Stephan Tillmann, Two-generator one-relator groups and
      marked polytopes, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 70 (2020), no. 2, 831–879.
      MR 4105952
[Ger92] S. M. Gersten, Problems on automatic groups, Algorithms and classification
      in combinatorial group theory (Berkeley, CA, 1989), Math. Sci. Res. Inst.
      Publ., vol. 23, Springer, New York, 1992, pp. 225–232. MR 1230636
[GKL21] Giles Gardam, Dawid Kielak, and Alan D Logan, Algebraically hyperbolic
      groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. (to appear), arXiv:2112.01331 (2021).
[GL17] Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt, JSJ decompositions of groups,
      Astérisque (2017), no. 395, vii+165. MR 3758992
[HK20] Fabian Henneke and Dawid Kielak, The agrarian polytope of two-generator
      one-relator groups, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 102 (2020), no. 2, 722–748.
      MR 4171432
[JZL25] Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain and Marco Linton, On the coherence of one-relator
      groups and their group algebras, Ann. of Math. (2) 201 (2025), no. 3, 909–
      959. MR 4899802
[JZLA20] Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain and Diego López-Álvarez, The strong Atiyah and
      Lück approximation conjectures for one-relator groups, Math. Ann. 376
      (2020), no. 3-4, 1741–1793. MR 4081128
[Kha04] Bilal Khan, The structure of automorphic conjugacy in the free group of
      rank two, Computational and experimental group theory, Contemp. Math.,
      vol. 349, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2004, pp. 115–196. MR 2077762
[KS71] A. Karrass and D. Solitar, Subgroups of HNN groups and groups with one
      defining relation, Canadian J. Math. 23 (1971), 627–643. MR 301102
40          GILES GARDAM, DAWID KIELAK, AND ALAN D. LOGAN

[KW99a] Ilya Kapovich and Richard Weidmann, On the structure of two-generated
      hyperbolic groups, Math. Z. 231 (1999), no. 4, 783–801. MR 1709496
[KW99b]            , Two-generated groups acting on trees, Arch. Math. (Basel) 73
      (1999), no. 3, 172–181. MR 1705011
[Lev05a] Gilbert Levitt, Automorphisms of hyperbolic groups and graphs of groups,
      Geom. Dedicata 114 (2005), 49–70. MR 2174093
[Lev05b]          , Characterizing rigid simplicial actions on trees, Geometric meth-
      ods in group theory, Contemp. Math., vol. 372, Amer. Math. Soc., Provi-
      dence, RI, 2005, pp. 27–33. MR 2139674
[Lin24] Marco        Linton,       Hyperbolic     one-relator      groups,      Cana-
      dian     Journal       of    Mathematics       (2024),      published    online,
      https://doi.org/10.4153/S0008414X24000427.
[LL78] Jacques Lewin and Tekla Lewin, An embedding of the group algebra of a
      torsion-free one-relator group in a field, J. Algebra 52 (1978), no. 1, 39–74.
      MR 485972
[Log16a] Alan D. Logan, The JSJ-decompositions of one-relator groups with tor-
      sion, Geom. Dedicata 180 (2016), 171–185. MR 3451463
[Log16b]          , The outer automorphism groups of two-generator, one-relator
      groups with torsion, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 144 (2016), no. 10, 4135–4150.
      MR 3531167
[LS77] Roger C. Lyndon and Paul E. Schupp, Combinatorial group theory, Classics
      in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977, Reprint of the 1977 edition.
      MR 1812024
[LT17] Larsen Louder and Nicholas Touikan, Strong accessibility for finitely pre-
      sented groups, Geom. Topol. 21 (2017), no. 3, 1805–1835. MR 3650082
[LW20] Larsen Louder and Henry Wilton, One-relator groups with torsion are co-
      herent, Math. Res. Lett. 27 (2020), no. 5, 1499–1512. MR 4216595
[LW22]          , Negative immersions for one-relator groups, Duke Math. J. 171
      (2022), no. 3, 547–594. MR 4382976
[Lyn50] Roger C. Lyndon, Cohomology theory of groups with a single defining re-
      lation, Ann. of Math. (2) 52 (1950), 650–665. MR 47046
[Mag30] Wilhelm Magnus, Über diskontinuierliche Gruppen mit einer definierenden
      Relation. (Der Freiheitssatz), J. Reine Angew. Math. 163 (1930), 141–165.
      MR 1581238
[Mag32]          , Das Identitätsproblem für Gruppen mit einer definierenden Rela-
      tion, Math. Ann. 106 (1932), no. 1, 295–307. MR 1512760
[MKS04] Wilhelm Magnus, Abraham Karrass, and Donald Solitar, Combinatorial
      group theory, second ed., Dover Publications, Inc., Mineola, NY, 2004, Pre-
      sentations of groups in terms of generators and relations. MR 2109550
[MS20] Suraj Krishna Meda Satish, Immersed cycles and the JSJ decomposition,
      Algebr. Geom. Topol. 20 (2020), no. 4, 1877–1938. MR 4127086
[NB21] Carl-Fredrik Nyberg-Brodda, The B B Newman spelling theorem, Br. J.
      Hist. Math. 36 (2021), no. 2, 117–131. MR 4280006
[New73] B. B. Newman, The soluble subgroups of a one-relator group with torsion,
      J. Austral. Math. Soc. 16 (1973), 278–285, Collection of articles dedicated
      to the memory of Hanna Neumann, III. MR 0338188
   JSJ DECOMPOSITIONS AND POLYTOPES FOR ONE-RELATOR GROUPS 41

[Pri77] Stephen J. Pride, The isomorphism problem for two-generator one-relator
       groups with torsion is solvable, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 227 (1977), 109–139.
       MR 430085
[Ros86] Gerhard Rosenberger, All generating pairs of all two-generator Fuchsian
       groups, Arch. Math. (Basel) 46 (1986), no. 3, 198–204. MR 834836
[RS97] E. Rips and Z. Sela, Cyclic splittings of finitely presented groups and the
       canonical JSJ decomposition, Ann. of Math. (2) 146 (1997), no. 1, 53–109.
       MR 1469317
[Sel95] Z. Sela, The isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups. I, Ann. of Math.
       (2) 141 (1995), no. 2, 217–283. MR 1324134
[Sel97]         , Structure and rigidity in (Gromov) hyperbolic groups and discrete
       groups in rank 1 Lie groups. II, Geom. Funct. Anal. 7 (1997), no. 3, 561–593.
       MR 1466338
[Sel09]         , Diophantine geometry over groups. VII. The elementary theory of
       a hyperbolic group, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 99 (2009), no. 1, 217–273.
       MR 2520356
[Ser03] Jean-Pierre Serre, Trees, Springer Monographs in Mathematics, Springer-
       Verlag, Berlin, 2003, Translated from the French original by John Stillwell,
       Corrected 2nd printing of the 1980 English translation. MR 1954121
[Č71] A. A. Čebotar’, Subgroups of groups with one defining relation that do not
       contain free subgroups of rank 2, Algebra i Logika 10 (1971), 570–586.
       MR 0313404
[Wis12] Daniel T. Wise, From riches to raags: 3-manifolds, right-angled Artin
       groups, and cubical geometry, CBMS Regional Conference Series in Math-
       ematics, vol. 117, Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical
       Sciences, Washington, DC; by the American Mathematical Society, Provi-
       dence, RI, 2012. MR 2986461

  Mathematisches Institut, Universität Bonn, Endenicher Allee 60,
53115 Bonn, Germany
  Email address: gardam@math.uni-bonn.de

  University of Oxford, Oxford, OX2 6GG, UK
  Email address: kielak@maths.ox.ac.uk

  Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK
  Email address: A.Logan@hw.ac.uk
