                                             Contemporary Mathematics
arXiv:math/0002217v1 [math.RA] 25 Feb 2000




                                                   Bass’s Work in Ring Theory and Projective Modules

                                                                                      T. Y. Lam

                                                              This paper is dedicated to Hyman Bass on his 65th birthday.


                                                      Abstract. The early papers of Hyman Bass in the late 50s and the early 60s
                                                      leading up to his pioneering work in algebraic K-theory have played an im-
                                                      portant and very special role in ring theory and the theory of projective (and
                                                      injective) modules. In this article, we give a general survey of Bass’s funda-
                                                      mental contributions in this early period of his work, and explain how much
                                                      this work has influenced and shaped the thinking of subsequent researchers in
                                                      the area.




                                             Contents

                                             §0. Introduction

                                             Part I: Projective (and Torsionfree) Modules

                                             §1.   Big Projectives
                                             §2.   Stable Structure of Projective Modules
                                             §3.   Work Related to Serre’s Conjecture
                                             §4.   Rings with Binary Generated Ideals: Bass Rings

                                             Part II: Ring Theory

                                             §5.   Semiperfect Rings as Generalizations of Semiprimary Rings
                                             §6.   Perfect Rings and Restricted DCC
                                             §7.   Perfect Rings and Representation Theory
                                             §8.   Stable Range of Rings
                                             §9.   Rings of Stable Range One

                                             References


                                                 1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 16D40, 16E20, 16L30; Secondary 16D70,
                                             16E10, 16G30.
                                                 The work on this paper was supported in part by a grant from NSA.

                                                                                                                       c 0000 (copyright holder)

                                                                                            1
2                                         T. Y. LAM


                                    §0. Introduction
     It gives me great pleasure to have this opportunity to write about Professor
Hyman Bass’s work in ring theory and projective modules. This was work done by
a young Hyman in the early 60s when he was a junior faculty member at Columbia.
The now-classical paper on the homological generalization of semiprimary rings
[B1 ], an outgrowth of his 1959 Chicago thesis written under the direction of Irving
Kaplansky, was followed in quick succession by a brilliant series of papers [B2 –B7 ] on
various aspects of the structure of projective modules (decomposition, extendibil-
ity, and freeness) and injective modules (injective dimensions, Gorenstein rings,
and Bass rings). The 1962 announcement of a homotopy theory of projective mod-
ules with Schanuel [BS] and the subsequent 1964 announcement [B8 ] on the stable
structure of the general linear group over an arbitrary ring culminated in his famous
IHES paper [B9 ] which, perhaps more than any other work in that era, marked the
monumental creation of the new mathematical subject of algebraic K-theory. The
usual way to put it would be to say, I guess, that all of this work “showed the future
master”; but in fact, by this time, Hyman Bass had already proved himself to be
a true master of the great art of algebra — and a mathematician of extraordinary
creativity and insight.

    Since Chuck Weibel [We] will be touching upon Bass’s work in algebraic K-
theory and Craig Huneke [Hu] will be reporting on his work on injective modules
and Gorenstein rings, I shall focus the discussion in this article mainly on Bass’s
contributions to ring theory and the structure of projective modules. Starting with
the latter, we first survey, in §1 and §2 below, Bass’s work on big projectives and
on his generalizations and extensions of Serre’s results on the stable structure of
projective modules. In §3, we move on to Bass’s work surrounding the theme of
Serre’s Conjecture on f.g.1 projective modules over polynomial rings. The last
section of Part I concludes with a survey on Bass’s work on the decomposition of
torsionfree modules and on commutative rings with binary generated ideals, which
resulted in the important notion of Bass rings and Bass orders. In this section (§4),
Gorenstein rings play a substantial role, but our exposition is designed to overlap
only peripherally with that of Huneke’s article.

     In Part II of this article, we return to Bass’s maiden work on the homological
generalizations of semiprimary rings, and explain the historic context of this work
as well as the role it played in the subsequent development of noncommutative ring
theory. Guided by the ideas of stability in the homotopy theory of vector bundles,
Bass also single-handedly invented the notion of stable range of a ring R, which
he successfully applied to the study of the stable structure of the infinite general
linear group over R. (This work may be thought of as the “K1 -analogue” of the
stable theory of projective modules reported in §2.) Our survey concludes with a
discussion (§§8-9) of Bass’s work on the stable range, with a special emphasis on
the case of stable range one which in turn has deep significance on the arithmetic
of rings, and on questions concerning the cancellation and substitution of modules
with respect to direct sum decompositions.

    Throughout this exposition, our aim is not only to survey Bass’s work in ring
theory and projective modules, but also to point out how much this work has
    1 Throughout this paper, “f.g.” will be used as an abbreviation for “finitely generated”.
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                               3


influenced and shaped the thinking of subsequent researchers in the area. It will
be seen that, in a number of new lines of investigation in algebra in the last few
decades, it was the decisive pioneering steps of Bass that broke open the new path.
Although Bass’s work in modules and rings spanned only the decade of the 60s,
its impact has been enormous indeed, and will certainly continue to be felt as ring
theory moves into the next century.

     Writing this article is for me a very pleasant task, though undertaking such a
task inevitably involves somewhat of a nostalgic trip down the memory lane. Since
it is perhaps not out of place in these Proceedings to talk about one’s connections
to Hyman, I will indulge myself in a few personal reminiscences below.

     As a beginning graduate student at Columbia in the mid-60s, I was more than
a little awed by the power and fame of the senior faculty: Professors Lipman Bers,
Samuel Eilenberg, Ellis Kolchin, Masatake Kuranishi, Serge Lang, Edgar Lorch,
and Paul A. Smith, among others, from whom I took my first and second year
graduate courses.2 After a few skirmishes with functional analysis (taught to me
by Professor Lorch and Visiting Professor B. Sz. Nagy), I fell under the spell of
Sammy Eilenberg, and positioned myself to become a student of his, hoping to
study with him category theory and homological algebra. Under Sammy’s guidance,
I wrote my first paper [La1 ], which he kindly communicated to the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences (of which he was a member). But then for the
year 1966-67, Professor Eilenberg had his Sabbatical coming, and he was to go off
to Paris to spend the entire academic year. To go with him to Paris would have
been the “cool” thing to do for a mid-career graduate student except, alas, I found
myself both financially and linguistically poorly equipped to make the trip. So
Professor Eilenberg said to me: “Why don’t you stay here, and study with Bass
while I am gone?” This was how I became a student of Bass! Hyman was then a
young Assistant Professor, who, just a few years ago, was brought from Chicago to
Columbia by Sammy himself.

     Hyman became an Associate Professor around that time, and in another year he
was moved up to Full Professor. Even I could see he must be working on something
hot! So I xeroxed all of his papers,3 and started poring over them assiduously.
Hyman’s K-theory paper [B9 ] had just come out in the “Blue Journal”; this and his
earlier papers in ring theory and projective modules eventually became a staple of
my graduate education. The most challenging open problem in homological algebra
in those days was Serre’s Conjecture (ibid.); many a graduate student in algebra
from that era had no doubt tried his/her hand at it — and I was no exception.
Hyman, who had generalized Seshadri’s solution of the Conjecture in two variables,
was the natural leader for this small circle of aspiring graduate students. I still
    2 The students were nothing short of stellar either! My graduate peers included Mike Engber,

Audun Holme, Fred Gardiner, and Irwin Kra; Winfried Scharlau was a visiting student from
Germany, and Alexander Mikhalev was an exchange scholar from U.S.S.R.; Bill Haboush, Tony
Bak, Mike Stein, Allen Altman, Bruce Bennett, Spencer Bloch, Bob and Jane Gilman were a couple
of years behind; Julius Shaneson, Sylvain Cappell and Ethan Akin were “hot-shot” Columbia
undergraduates taking graduate courses with us. Each person in this list is now a Professor of
Mathematics. Many of them have been chairs, provosts, and deans.
     3 Yes, there were already xerox machines in the mid-60s, though stencils and mimeographed

copies were still not entirely out of fashion.
4                                    T. Y. LAM


recall that, one time, one of us thought he had a brilliant idea to solve Serre’s
Conjecture. A few of us excitedly met with Hyman in an impromptu seminar to go
over the “idea”; but of course Hyman quickly found the hole. Although we never
got anywhere with our fledgling efforts, my fascination with Serre’s Conjecture
continued, and culminated in the writing of my 1978 Springer Lecture Notes [La2 ],
two years after the Conjecture was fully solved independently by Suslin and Quillen.
Hyman’s great influence was evident from cover to cover of my modest book.

     I spent my last graduate year at Columbia in 1966-67. In that year, Hyman
taught what was most probably the first graduate course ever given in algebraic
K-theory in the US. Pavaman Murthy had come from the Tata Institute to do post-
doctoral work with Hyman, and was in the audience. (In his modest Morningside
Heights apartment, Pavaman served what he claimed to be the best coffee in Man-
hattan. It was free, so I had no reason to disagree; we became good friends.) Some
of the lecture notes taken by Murthy, Charles Small and me eventually evolved into
Hyman’s famed tome [Ba10 ]. At that time, Hyman was busy at work with Milnor
and Serre on the Congruence Subgroup Problem for the special linear groups and
the symplectic groups. I got lucky and proved several little things about Mennicke
symbols and SK1 of abelian group rings, which earned me a few attributions in
[BMS]. Needless to say, I was proud to be mentioned in a paper by such distin-
guished authors. I got lucky in some other fronts too, and in May, 1967 completed
a thesis in algebraic K-theory under Hyman dealing with Artin’s Induction The-
orem and induction techniques for Grothendieck groups and Whitehead groups of
finite groups. In those days, algebraic K-theory meant only K0 and K1 ; even
Milnor’s K2 had not been defined yet.

    As it happened, I was Hyman’s first Ph.D. student. I have always viewed
this as a special honor, and I am sure that this fact has helped me a great deal
professionally. Now the list of Ph.D. students of Hyman is 25(?) strong. The
longevity of Hyman as a thesis advisor is rather strikingly illustrated by the fact
that at least several of my mathematical brothers and sisters in this list were not
even born yet when I completed my Ph.D. degree at Columbia.

    In supervising my work, Hyman never tried to tell me what I should work on.
Rather, he let me find my own path, and instilled in me the needed confidence
to grow into a research mathematician. What I learned from Hyman was not
just mathematics, but how to do mathematics, and, what is perhaps even more
important, how to conduct myself as a mathematician. All of this he taught me in
the best way — by his own example. For this, and for the many other favors he
has rendered over the years, I shall always be grateful.

               Part I: Projective (and Torsionfree) Modules

                              §1. Big Projectives
     While the projective modules occurring in number theory, representation theory
and algebraic geometry are mostly f.g. ones, non-f.g. projective modules do arise
naturally over various kinds of rings, for instance, rings of continuous functions.
Thus, the quest for information about non-f.g. projective modules is not a frivolous
one.
             BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                         5


     The first significant result in the study of general (that is, not necessarily f.g.)
projective modules was found by Kaplansky in 1958. In his seminal paper [K2 ],
Kaplansky proved that, for any ring R, any projective R-module is always a direct
sum of countably generated (projective) modules. This result has two interesting
consequences. First, any indecomposable projective module over any ring is count-
ably generated; and second, if any countably generated projective module over some
ring R is free, then any projective R-module is also free. The case of a local ring R
provides a particularly striking illustration for the power of the second statement:
in this case, Kaplansky used an ingenious argument (reminiscent of the proof of
Nakayama’s Lemma) to show that any countably generated projective R-module is
free, from which it then follows that any projective R-module is free.

    Inspired by Kaplansky’s result, Bass took up the study of “big” projective mod-
ules in [B5 ]. The overall theme of [B5 ] is that, under certain fairly mild conditions
on a ring R, “big” projective R-modules are necessarily free. To formulate this
precisely, Bass introduced the notion of a uniformly ℵ-big module: for an infinite
cardinal ℵ, an R-module P is uniformly ℵ-big if P can be generated by ℵ ele-
ments, and for any ideal I ( R, the R/I-module P/I P cannot be generated by
fewer than ℵ elements. For instance, the free module of rank ℵ over a nonzero ring
R is uniformly ℵ-big. Bass’s first result on big projectives is the following converse
of this statement:

(1.1) Theorem. If R/rad(R) is left noetherian, then, for any infinite cardinal ℵ,
any uniformly ℵ-big projective left R-module is free.

     Bass’s proof of this result is modeled upon Kaplansky’s proof of his main the-
orem in [K2 ]: one makes a reduction to the crucial case when ℵ is the countable
infinite cardinal ℵ0 , and in this case one achieves the desired goal by a clever
juggling with infinite matrices.

     For concrete applications of (1.1), one needs to find situations where we can
say, for instance, that all non-f.g. projective modules are uniformly big for some
infinite cardinal. Bass showed that this is the case when, say, R is a commutative
noetherian ring with only trivial idempotents. Thus, one has the following

(1.2) Corollary. If R is a commutative noetherian ring with only trivial idempo-
tents, then any non-f.g. projective R-module is free.

    For instance, if R = k[x1 , . . . , xn ] where k is a field, Serre asked in 1955 (see
§2) if every f.g. projective R-module P is free. The result above would give the
freeness of P if P was not f.g.

    The general results of Bass (such as (1.1) and (1.2)) describing the behavior
of big projectives have remained essentially unsurpassed to this date. In [B5 ],
Bass remarked that these results seemed to indicate that big projective modules
“invite little interest.” We can say, today, that this is perhaps not quite true. In a
recent paper [LR], Levy and Robson have determined the structure of all infinitely
generated projective modules over (noncommutative) hereditary noetherian prime
rings. Their results showed that, over such rings, there may exist non-f.g. projective
modules which are not free and which have rather interesting structures.
6                                      T. Y. LAM


     Two other results of Bass on projective modules over any ring have become
folklore in the subject, so it is fitting to end this section by recalling them. The
first of these says that:

(1.3) Theorem. Any nonzero projective module P over any ring R has a maximal
submodule. More precisely, rad(R) P = rad(P ) 6= P , where rad(P ) denotes the
intersection of all maximal submodules of P .

     This result first appeared in [B1 : p. 474], and has been used by many authors
since. The second result, also involving the Jacobson radical of a ring R, states the
following:

(1.4) Theorem. Let I be any ideal of a ring R such that I ⊆ rad(R), and P, Q
be f.g. projective left R-modules. Then
(1.5)         ∼ Q as R-modules ⇐⇒ P/IP =
            P =                           ∼ Q/IQ as R/I-modules.
In particular, P is free as an R-module iff P/IP is free as an R/I-module.

     This result, which made its first appearance in the literature as Lemma 2.4
in [B2 ], is now in virtually every textbook which treats the subject of projective
modules, and is well-known to any student knowledgeable about the subject of
homological algebra. We should point out that, with Bass’s notion of left T -
nilpotency on (1-sided) ideals (introduced later in §6), (1.4) can also be given the
following “transfinite” formulation, for any pair of projective modules P, Q:

(1.6) Theorem. If I is any left T -nilpotent left ideal in a ring R, then (1.5) holds
for any (not necessarily f.g.) projective left R-modules P, Q.

    For a proof of this, see [La3 : (23.17)].

                §2. Stable Structure of Projective Modules
     In his epoch-making papers [S1 , S2 ], Serre established an analogy between pro-
jective modules (in algebra) and vector bundles (in topology). This important
analogy, which was further promulgated by the work of Swan [Sw1 ], enables one
to establish the rudiments of a dictionary to translate the language of projective
modules into that of vector bundles. Now by the late 1950s, the topology of vec-
tor bundles was already rather well-developed; the Serre-Swan analogy mentioned
above made it possible, therefore, for algebraists to “predict” (if not prove) theo-
rems in the theory of projective modules based on their knowledge of topological
results in the theory of vector bundles.

    One of the best known elementary facts about vector bundles is the following.
If [X, Y ] denotes the set of homotopy classes of maps from X to Y , and BO(r)
denotes the classifying space of the orthogonal group O(r), then

(2.1) Theorem. For any connected finite CW complex X of dimension d, the
natural map
                   ir : [X, BO(r)] −→ [X, BO(r + 1)]
is surjective for r ≥ d, and injective (and hence bijective) for r ≥ d + 1.
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                7


     Now by the classification theorem of vector bundles, [X, BO(r)] represents the
set of equivalence classes of real r-plane bundles over X, and, with this interpre-
tation, the map ir in (2.1) above is given by adding a trivial line bundle. To
make the transfer into algebra, we replace X by a commutative noetherian ring
R with only trivial idempotents (so that the Zariski prime spectrum Spec(R) is a
connected space), and replace [X, BO(r)] by the set Pr (R) of isomorphism classes
of f.g. projective R-modules of rank r. The ir in (2.1) is then to be replaced by the
map given by “adding a copy of R”. With such a transfer in place, Serre broke new
ground by coming up with commutative algebra techniques to prove the following
remarkable analogue of the surjectivity part of (2.1).

(2.2) Theorem. ([S2 : Théorème 1]) In the above setting, assume that the maximal
ideal spectrum max(R) (with the Zariski topology) is a space of dimension4 d. Then
the map
(2.3)                              ir : Pr (R) → Pr+1 (R)
is surjective if r ≥ d. In other words, any f.g. projective R-module of rank p > d
is of the form Rp−d ⊕ P0 for some (projective) module P0 .

    In this setting (and under the same hypotheses), the question whether the map
ir in (2.3) is injective for r ≥ d + 1 (in analogy to the second part of (2.1)) begs
to be asked. This amounts to the following cancellation question for f.g. projective
R-modules P, Q and M : if M ⊕ P ∼     = M ⊕ Q and P has rank > d, does it follow
that P ∼= Q? It would be difficult to imagine that Serre was not aware of this very
natural question in 1957-58, but anyhow, Serre did not pursue it in [Se1 ].

     In his two papers [B2 ] and [B9 ] (see also the research announcement [BS] written
jointly with S. Schanuel), Bass not only answered this question in the affirmative,
but also relaxed some of the assumptions in (2.2), and extended all results to a
noncommutative setting. Working now with a commutative ring A and a module-
finite A-algebra R, Bass considered R-modules P which need not be projective
or f.g. He defined such a module to be of f -rank ≥ r if, at every maximal ideal
m ∈ max(A), the Rm -module Pm contains an Rm -free direct summand of rank r.

(2.4) Theorem. In the above (noncommutative) setting, assume that max(A) is
a noetherian space of dimension d.
(1) (Splitting) If an R-module P is a direct summand of a direct sum of finitely
presented R-modules and has f-rank > d, then P has a direct summand isomorphic
to R.
(2) (Cancellation) Let P, Q be R-modules such that P has a projective direct sum-
mand of f-rank > d. Then, for any f.g. projective R-module M ,
(2.5)                     M ⊕P ∼ = M ⊕ Q =⇒ P ∼    = Q.

   If we now define Pr (R) to be the set of isomorphism classes of f.g. projective
R-modules of f -rank r, clearly (1) and (2) above imply that:
      4 The dimension of a topological space X is defined to be the supremum of the codimensions

of its nonempty closed sets. Here, the codimension of an irreducible closed set F is the supremum
of the lengths of finite chains of irreducible closed sets “above” F , and the codimension of an
arbitrary closed set C is the infimum of the codimensions of all irreducible closed sets F ⊆ C.
8                                     T. Y. LAM


(2.6) Corollary. The map ir : Pr (R) → Pr+1 (R) (defined by adding R) is
surjective for r ≥ d, and injective (and hence bijective) for r ≥ d + 1.

    Just as (2.1) is quantitatively the best result for bundles in topology, both (2.2)
and (2.5), (2.6) are quantitatively the best for f.g. projective modules in algebra.
We’ll mention the usual examples to substantiate this statement in the commutative
and noncommutative cases below.

    In the commutative case, let R be the real coordinate ring of the sphere S 2 ,
so R = R[x, y, z], with the relation x2 + y 2 + z 2 = 1. This is a noetherian domain
of (Krull) dimension 2. Let P = ker(ϕ) where ϕ is the R-epimorphism R3 −→ R
given by ϕ(e1 ) = x, ϕ(e2 ) = y, and ϕ(e3 ) = z. We have R3 ∼           = R ⊕ P , so
P is a f.g. projective R-module of rank 2. Here, P corresponds to the tangent
bundle of S 2 . Since the tangent bundle is known to be indecomposable, P is also
indecomposable (and in particular P ≇ R2 ), so the class of P in P2 (R) is not
in the image of the map i1 in (2.3). This shows that the condition r ≥ d for
the surjective part in (2.6) is the best possible. On the other hand, the fact that
R⊕P ∼  = R ⊕ R2 and P ≇ R2 shows that the condition r ≥ d + 1 for the injective
part in (2.6) is also the best possible.

    In the noncommutative setting, a very simple case for application is that of a
group ring R = Z π, where π is a finite group. Here we take A to be Z in (2.4),
and set d = 1. It follows from (2.4)(1) that any f.g. projective R-module is a direct
sum of rank 1 projective modules. But, according to a famous example of Swan
[Sw2 ], if π is the generalized quaternion group of order 32, there exists a nonfree
rank 1 f.g. projective R-module P such that R ⊕ P ∼     = R ⊕ R. Since P ≇ R, we
see again that, in the conclusion in (2.4)(2), the condition rank (P ) > d cannot be
further weakened. In Swan’s construction, the module P was, in fact, chosen such
that, for a suitable maximal order S containing R = Z π, S ⊗R P ≇ S. Therefore,
by tensoring up to S, we obtain a similar example (of non-cancellation) over a left
and right hereditary module-finite algebra over the one-dimensional ring Z.

    Of course, the bounds r ≥ d and r ≥ d + 1 are just general bounds for
surjectivity and injectivity to hold, respectively, in (2.6). For specific rings, there
can be stronger results. For instance, in contrast with Swan’s example mentioned
above, if π0 is the (ordinary) quaternion group of order 8, then full cancellation
holds for f.g. projective modules over the group ring Z π0 , according to a result of
J. Martinet [Ma].

     Bass’s fundamental results (2.4) and (2.6) in the early 60s provided the general
framework for much of the subsequent investigations on the Splitting and Cancel-
lation Problems for projective (and more general) modules over various classes of
rings. Without giving any details, let us just mention, in this direction, the work of
Chase, Mohan Kumar, Murthy, Nori, Sridharan, Suslin, Swan, Towber, Wiegand,
and others on the splitting and cancellation of f.g. projective modules over affine
algebras. A survey of some aspects of this appears in Murthy’s article [Mu] in
this volume. On the noncommutative side, there are the important cancellation
results of Jacobinski, Guralnick, Levy, Roĭter, Swan and many others for lattices
over group rings and orders in separable algebras.
                BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                        9


    Now it may be said that a cancellation result such as (2.4)(2) is not quite truly in
the noncommutative spirit. In this theorem, the ring R in question is a module-finite
algebra over a commutative ring A; orders in finite-dimensional separable algebras
are also of the same nature. Such rings are simply not sufficiently representative of a
general noncommutative ring. Later developments show that there are indeed some
“truly noncommutative” cancellation theorems, where the cancellation of a module
M in (2.5) depends on the “stable range” of the endomorphism ring of M and on
the structure of the module P . Such results, which in essence generalize (2.4)(2),
were first found by Warfield [Wa2 ] in 1980 (and in part by Evans in 1973). We shall
return to formulate these more general cancellation results after we introduce the
notion of stable range of (noncommutative) rings in §8.

                       §3. Work Related to Serre’s Conjecture
    In the Serre-Swan analogy between vector bundles and projective modules, the
counterpart of the affine n-space k n over a field k is the polynomial ring in n
variables R = k[x1 , . . . , xn ], so vector bundles over k n correspond to f.g. projec-
tive modules over R. From the viewpoint of topology, the (real) affine n-space is
contractible, so the vector bundles over it are all trivial. This led Serre to ask the
question, in his famous FAC paper [S1 ], whether every f.g. projective module over
the polynomial ring R = k[x1 , . . . , xn ] is free (for any field k). An affirmative
answer to this question seemed so plausible and convincing to the mathematical
public that, almost from the very beginning, it became known under the misnomer
of “Serre’s Conjecture”. This “conjecture” is clearly true when n = 1, since in this
case R = k[x1 ] is a PID, and f.g. projective modules over a PID are well known
to be free. In the general case, it is known (essentially from Hilbert’s Syzygy The-
orem) that any f.g. projective module P over R = k[x1 , . . . , xn ] is stably free, so
Serre’s Conjecture boils down to a cancellation statement: that P ⊕ R free should
imply P free.5 By Bass’s Theorem (2.6)(2), this would follow, for instance, if the
rank of P is at least n + 1.

     In the 1960s, Serre’s Conjecture became one of the premier open problems in
algebra. The fact that the Conjecture was prompted by a natural analogy with
vector bundle theory gave it a certain sense of inevitability; on the other hand, the
fact that the conjecture can be stated so directly and in such completely elementary
terms made it enticing to all. Many algebraists in the 1960s, junior and senior alike,
must have tried their hands at solving this famous conjecture. Bass’s interest in the
structure of projective modules, evident from his first two papers [B1 , B2 ], naturally
steered him in this direction.

     In 1958, Seshadri [Se1 ] confirmed Serre’s Conjecture in the case of two variables,
proving, as he put it, the “triviality of vector bundles over the affine space K 2 ”. As
a matter of fact, Seshadri showed more generally that any f.g. projective module P
over A[t] “comes from” A if A is a PID [Se1 ], or the coordinate ring of a nonsingular
affine curve over an algebraically closed field [Se2 ]. These results led Bass to consider
the same problem over R = A[t] when A is a Dedekind domain. The desired goal
     5 In this form, the Conjecture is capable of a completely elementary statement meaningful

to any student with a high school background in algebra: whenever f1 g1 + · · · + fr gr = 1 ∈ R,
there is an r × r matrix of determinant 1 over R with first row (f1 , . . . , fr ). See [La2 : (I.4.5)] for
details.
10                                    T. Y. LAM


in this case would be the same as Seshadri’s — to prove that any f.g. projective P
over R “comes from” A, that is, P ∼= R ⊗A P0 for some (necessarily f.g. projective)
module P0 over A.

    In the early 60s, Bass succeeded in extending Seshadri’s argument, and proved
the following result in [B4 : (2.4)].

(3.1) Theorem. Let A be a Dedekind ring, R = A[t], and P be a f.g. R-module
such that, for any prime ideal p ⊂ A, P/pP is a torsionfree (A/p)[t]-module.
Then P is extended from a f.g. projective A-module; in particular, P is projective.

     This implies, in particular, that any f.g. projective R-module is extended from
A. As it turned out, the same result was obtained independently by Serre at about
the same time; see [S3 ]. In retrospect, this result is perhaps most appropriately
called the Seshadri-Bass-Serre Theorem.

     In 1964, Bass took up what may be considered a noncommutative version of
Serre’s Problem. Perhaps not too surprisingly, the noncommutative case turned
out to be more tractable. Generalizing the work of P. M. Cohn, Bass succeeded in
proving that, if π is a free group (resp. a free monoid), then for any principal ideal
domain A, any f.g. projective module over the group ring (resp. monoid ring) A π
is free. This result appeared in Bass’s paper [B7 ], in the first volume of the Journal
of Algebra. In the case when π is a free monoid on one generator, it retrieves, of
course, Seshadri’s theorem in [Se1 ].

     Although Bass did not publish further results on Serre’s Conjecture after the
1960s, his keen interest in it continued well into the 70s. When Suslin and Vaserstein
began to make significant progress on the conjecture in the early 70s, the former
Soviet Union was still quite isolated mathematically from Europe and from the U.S.
In order to make their latest findings known to the West, Suslin and Vaserstein could
only communicate them by letter to Bass. I still remember vividly the AMS Annual
Meeting in San Francisco in 1974, in which Bass gave an “impromptu” lecture on
the most recent Suslin-Vaserstein results on Serre’s Conjecture — to a room-full
of people eager to find out how close Serre’s Conjecture had come to being solved.
One of these “From Russia, with Love” results proclaimed the freeness of projective
k[x1 , . . . , xn ]-modules “of rank ≥ 1 + n/2”. This surely looked wonderful, but a
high-school algebra question unwittingly came up: when Suslin wrote “1 + n/2 ” in
his letter to Bass, did he mean 1 + n2 , or could he have meant the more ambitious
(1 + n)/2 ? It was anybody’s guess . . . . (As it turned out, Suslin did mean 1 + n2 ,
as he, perhaps, should.) Later in June that year, in Paris, Bass was to give a
similar lecture on the status of Serre’s Conjecture in the “Séminaire Bourbaki”.
The write-up of these survey lectures subsequently appeared in Bass’s article [B12 ],
with the charming title “Libération des modules projectifs . . . ”.

     Serre’s Conjecture stood open for over twenty years, and was finally proved in
1976, completely independently and almost simultaneously, by D. Quillen [Qu] and
A. Suslin [Su]. (For a detailed exposition on this, see [La2 ].) As is often the case
in mathematics, however, the solution of one important conjecture was only to be
followed by the formulation of a new, more powerful, conjecture. After 1976, Serre’s
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                              11


Conjecture was generalized into the so-called Bass-Quillen Conjecture, which states
the following:

(3.2)d If A is a commutative regular ring 6 of Krull dimension ≤ d < ∞ , then any
f.g. projective A[x1 , . . . , xn ]-module is extended from A.

     When A is a field, of course, this gives back the original Serre Conjecture (now
the Quillen-Suslin Theorem). When A is a Dedekind ring and n = 1, (3.2)1 is the
Theorem of Seshadri, Bass, and Serre. By a powerful general technique known as
“Quillen Induction”, which is gleaned from Quillen’s solution of Serre’s Conjecture
(see [La2 : p. 139]), one can reduce the proof of (3.2)d to a demonstration of the
following special case of it:

(3.3)d If A is a regular local ring of Krull dimension ≤ d, then any f.g. projective
A[x1 ]-module is free.

     The best result on (3.2)d and (3.3)d known to me is that they are both true
when d ≤ 2, or when A is a formal power series ring over a field; see [La2 : p. 138].
On several occasions, I have heard research announcements claiming the general
truth of (3.2)d (for all n and all d), but so far I have not seen any published
proofs. Thus, it appears that “Serre’s Conjecture” first raised in the 1950s is still
very much alive today: it has simply undergone a mathematical metamorphosis
and has now become the even more challenging “Bass-Quillen Conjecture”. Given
this, we can say with a reasonable amount of certainly that the work of Bass on
Serre’s Conjecture and its generalizations will continue to have its impact on the
mathematics of the next century.

            §4. Rings with Binary Generated Ideals: Bass Rings
     One way to try to prove Serre’s Conjecture over R = k[x1 , . . . , xn ] (k a field)
would be to show that any f.g. projective R-module is isomorphic to a direct sum
of ideals in R (and then use the fact that Pic(R) = {1} for the unique factorization
domain R). The conclusion of Bass’s Theorem (3.1) has a rather similar flavor: for
any Dedekind ring A, this result says that any f.g. module P over R = A[t] satis-
fying the torsionfree hypothesis in that theorem is extended from a f.g. projective
A-module P0 . Over the Dedekind ring A, P0 is isomorphic to a direct sum of
ideals, so P is likewise isomorphic to a direct sum of ideals in R. Considerations
such as this led Bass to the following general question on the decomposition of
torsionfree modules:

(4.1) When is it true that any f.g. torsionfree module over a (commutative) noe-
therian domain R is isomorphic to a direct sum of ideals?

Equivalently, when is it true that any f.g. indecomposable torsionfree R-module
has rank 1 (that is, isomorphic to an ideal of R) ?

    As it turned out, this interesting question led Bass to a fruitful program of
research. In his paper [B4 ], Bass not only proved the result (3.1), but also obtained
a criterion for the decomposability of all f.g. torsionfree modules into rank one
    6 A commutative noetherian ring A is said to be regular if A is a regular local ring for any
                                                                p
prime ideal p ⊂ A.
12                                         T. Y. LAM


modules over a noetherian domain R, under a mild assumption on the integral
closure R̃ of R. The main theorem (1.7) in [B4 ] gives the following definitive
result.

(4.2) Theorem. For any commutative noetherian domain R such that R̃ is f.g. as
an R-module, the following two conditions are equivalent:
(1) Any f.g. torsionfree R-module is isomorphic to a direct sum of ideals ;
(2) Any ideal in R can be generated by two elements.

     In Bass’s proof of this theorem, the hypothesis on R̃ is needed only for the
implication (2) ⇒ (1).7 This hypothesis is, of course, a very natural one from the
viewpoint of algebraic geometry. As a matter of fact, Bass’s proof (in [B4 ]) for
(2) ⇒ (1) in the above theorem is based on a rather subtle induction on the length
of the R-module R̃/R. The fact that this module has finite length is a consequence
of the first conclusion in the following result describing some of the key properties
of commutative domains with binary generated ideals.

(4.3) Theorem. If a commutative domain R has the property that any ideal in R
can be generated by two elements, then:
(1) R has Krull dimension ≤ 1 ;
(2) every ideal in R is reflexive 8 as an R-module .

     Here, the first conclusion, (1), goes back to I. S. Cohen. In fact, Cohen has
proved already in 1949 that the conclusion K-dim R ≤ 1 will follow if every ideal
of the domain R can be generated by k elements for a fixed integer k [C: p. 37,
Cor. 1]. Once we have K-dim R ≤ 1, the conclusion (2) follows from Lemma (1.6)
of [B4 ].

    Of course, the driving force behind all of these conditions in (4.2) and (4.3) is
the basic example of a Dedekind ring R. For such a ring, the properties (1), (2)
in (4.2) and (4.3) are well-known to every student of abstract algebra. The case
of Dedekind rings R is precisely the integrally closed case of these results, that is,
when R̃ = R. This is, in fact, the beginning case for Bass’s proof for (2) =⇒ (1) in
(4.2) by induction on lengthR (R̃/R). How about the case of non-Dedekind rings?
It behooves us to recall the two basic examples mentioned by Bass in [B4 : p. 324]:
     • Let R be the ring {a + 2b i : a, b ∈ Z}, as a subring of the Dedekind ring of
       Gaussian integers S. Here, R̃ = S, and lengthR (R̃/R) = 1. There are only
       two isomorphism types of nonzero ideals in R, namely, R and 2R + 2i R, so
       indeed every R-ideal is binary generated.
     • For another typical example, let I be the additive submonoid of the non-
       negative integers generated by 2 and an odd integerPn ≥ 3, and let R be
                                                                    i
       the subring of S = R[[t]] consisting of power series i≥0 ai t with ai = 0
       for i ∈
             / I. Then R̃ = S, lengthR (R̃/R) = n − 2, and again it is easy to
       check that every ideal of R is binary generated.

     7 In other words, (1) ⇒ (2) holds for any commutative noetherian domain R.
     8 An R -module P is said to be reflexive if the natural map from P to its double dual P ∗∗ is

an isomorphism.
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                 13


     So far we have quoted two main results ((4.2) and (4.3)) from [B4 ], which
arose from the consideration of torsionfree modules over commutative noetherian
domains, and have the common theme of binary generated ideals in such domains.
For Bass, there was another important motivation for these results ! In fact, (4.3)
is very much a part of Bass’s research program studying (not necessarily commuta-
tive) noetherian rings of finite injective dimensions over themselves. This is a very
important program he started in [B3 ], and continued in [B6 ]. Let us now explain
the connections.

     Classically, among the noetherian rings, those that are (say, left) self-injective
are the so-called quasi-Frobenius (QF) rings. These rings of self-injective dimension
zero have been extensively studied in the ring theory literature. In generalization of
this, Bass sought characterizations of noetherian rings R with id(R R) < ∞, where
“id” stands for the injective dimension (of a module). The case of id(R R) ≤ 1 was
successfully characterized by Jans [Ja] and Bass [B3 : (3.3)], as follows.

(4.4) Theorem. For any (left and right) noetherian ring R, the following are
equivalent:
(1) id(R R) ≤ 1;
(2) every f.g. torsionless right R-module 9 is reflexive ;
(3) If R P is f.g. projective and R N is f.g. torsionless, then any short exact sequence
0 → P → M → N → 0 splits.

     Here, since R is not a domain any more, we do not have a natural notion of
torsionfree modules. In their place, Bass introduced the notion of a torsionless
module: an R-module P is said to be torsionless if the natural map θP from P to
its double-dual P ∗∗ is a monomorphism (that is, for any nonzero p ∈ P , f (p) 6= 0
for some f ∈ P ∗ ). If R happens to be a commutative domain, a torsionless R-
module P is easily seen to be torsionfree; the converse does not hold in general, but
does hold if P is f.g.

    (We should note in passing that, in stating the above theorem (4.4) in [B3 ], Bass
had another “equivalent” condition: “Every right ideal in R is reflexive.” However,
while this condition is implied by those in (4.4), Bass’s argument for the converse
contained a gap, as was later acknowledged in [B6 : p.12]. In (6.2) of [B6 ], this extra
condition is restored in the commutative case, in the form “R is Cohen-Macaulay,
and every ideal in R is reflexive.”)

    Let us mention two well-known classes of rings that satisfy the conditions in
(4.4). First, consider any noetherian left hereditary ring R. For E = E(R R) (the
injective hull of R R), we have an exact sequence
                              0 −→ R −→ E −→ E/R −→ 0.
Here, the quotient module E/R must be injective, by [La5 : (3.22)]. Therefore,
we have id(R R) ≤ 1. Another interesting (and important) class of noetherian
rings R satisfying id(R R) ≤ 1 is given by the group rings kG, where k is any
Dedekind ring, and G is any finite group. These rings are “one-step away” from
    9 Yes, there is a change of side in this statement ! Torsionless modules will be defined in the

paragraph following the statement of the Theorem.
14                                    T. Y. LAM


the quasi-Frobenius rings, in that, if a is any nonzero element in k, the quotient
kG/(a) ∼
       = (k/(a))[G] is a well-known example of a QF ring (see [La5 : Exer. (15.14)]).

    For a commutative noetherian local ring R, the condition id(R R) < ∞ turns
out to be one of several equivalent conditions defining a (local) Gorenstein ring,
and for such a ring R, we have in fact id(R) = K-dim R. This homological char-
acterization of a local Gorenstein ring is close in spirit to the usual homological
characterization of regular local rings: recall that, by the theorem of Auslander-
Buchsbaum and Serre, regular local rings are exactly those noetherian local rings
R for which we have gl.dim(R) < ∞, or equivalently, gl.dim(R) = K-dim R.

     In the case of K-dim R = 0, the local Gorenstein rings are precisely the
local QF rings. In the case of K-dim R = 1, the earliest manifestation of local
Gorenstein rings was in the form of localizations of plane curves, and more generally,
complete intersection curves, as was noted by Apéry, Samuel, Gorenstein himself,
and Rosenlicht. We refer the reader to Craig Huneke’s article in this volume for
a thorough survey on the history of Gorenstein rings. In [Hu], Huneke traced
the Gorenstein ring notion from the work of the above-named authors to that of
Grothendieck and Serre, who defined local Gorenstein rings in the context of duality
theory, via the use of dualizing sheaves. After Serre observed the connection to rings
with finite self-injective dimensions, Bass wrote the famous “Ubiquity” paper [B6 ]
in 1963 to put the whole theory of Gorenstein rings on a firm footing. One of
the basic things he did in this splendid paper was to give a “global” definition for
Gorenstein rings: he called a general commutative noetherian ring R Gorenstein
if all localizations of R at prime ideals are local Gorenstein rings. If K-dim R
happens to be finite, this was shown to be equivalent to id(R) < ∞, and again, in
this case, id(R) = K-dim R. Various other characterizations for Gorenstein rings
(e.g. in terms of primary decompositions of ideals, multiplicities, etc.) are given in
the “Fundamental Theorem” in §1 of [B6 ].

     To bring the notion of Gorenstein rings to bear on the question of decomposi-
tions of modules considered in (4.2), Bass redid and generalized this result in §7 of
[B6 ]. To develop a theory suitable for applications to, say, integral representation
theory, Bass considered now a commutative reduced noetherian ring R of Krull
dimension 1, with a total ring of quotients K. It is no longer assumed that R is
a domain, but we retain the reasonable assumption that R̃, the integral closure
of R in K, is a f.g. R-module. (Of course, R̃ is just a finite direct product of
Dedekind rings.) The f.g. torsionless R-modules can be seen to be exactly those
f.g. R-modules M for which the natural map M −→ K ⊗R M is an injection.
These R-modules may be called R-lattices, in analogy with the terminology used
in integral representation theory. With this setting in place, Bass considered the
following three conditions on R:

     (1) Every R-ideal is generated by two elements.

     (2) Any ring between R and R̃ is a Gorenstein ring.

     (3) Every indecomposable R-lattice is isomorphic to an R-ideal.
               BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                  15


Bass’s main result in §7 of [B6 ] is that (1) ⇐⇒ (2) =⇒ (3) (and that (3) fails to
imply (1) and (2) “only in a situation that can be analyzed completely”.10 This
result constitutes an expansion and simplification of (4.2). The novel feature about
this result is the emergence of the “hereditarily Gorenstein” condition (2). In the
post-1963 literature, a ring R in the above setting satisfying this condition (2) (or
equivalently (1)) has been, quite justifiably, called a Bass ring.

    Later, various authors have obtained new characterizations for Bass rings. For
instance, if R and R̃ are as above, then the Bass ring conditions (1), (2) are further
shown to be equivalent to each of the following:

     (4) (Greither [Gr]) R̃ is binary generated as an R-module.
     (5) (Levy-Wiegand [LW]) R̃/R is a cyclic R-module.
    (6) (Wiegand [Wi]) Every faithful R-lattice has a direct summand isomorphic
to a faithful ideal.

     Yet other characterizations are obtained by Handelman in [Ha2 ]. Not to be
outdone by Bass’s “ubiquity” title, Handelman called his own paper “Propinquity
of one-dimensional Gorenstein rings”.11 In the 80s, Bass was one of the communi-
cating editors for the Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra; it was perhaps not a
coincidence, therefore, that the papers of Handelman, Greither, and Levy-Wiegand
all appeared in that same journal !

     In classical commutative algebra, there is a well-known Steinitz-Chevalley the-
ory for f.g. modules over Dedekind domains. In studying Bass rings, a natural
topic to investigate is therefore the classification problem for R-lattices. This prob-
lem has been successfully tackled by Levy and Wiegand. In [LW], they show, in
generalization of the Steinitz-Chevalley theory, that any given R-lattice M over a
Bass ring R is determined by its genus,12 together with the class of a faithful ideal
cℓ (M ) ⊆ R associated with M . Levy and Wiegand have also obtained very inter-
esting cancellation theorems for projective lattices over Bass rings, and later, Levy
[Le] even extended these results from R-lattices to general f.g. R-modules over a
specific class of Bass rings.

    Of course, the most classical examples of Bass rings are the Dedekind rings (and
their finite direct products). The next class of (non-integrally closed) examples are
the quadratic orders, that is, Z-orders in a quadratic number field. Any nonzero
ideal in such an order R is isomorphic to Z2 , and is therefore binary generated;
therefore, R is a Bass order. For yet another class of examples, consider the integral
group ring R = Z G for a finite abelian group G. As we have indicated before,
     10 In analyzing the situations in which (3) fails to imply (1) and (2), however, Bass seemed

to have overlooked certain cases. A more complete analysis when R is local was given later by
Nazarova and Roĭter in [NR]; for the general case, see the paper of Haefner and Levy [HL]. The
main difference between (3) and (1) lies in the fact that (1) is a local property (as Bass had shown
in [Ba6 : (7.4)]), while (3) is not a local property (see [Gr: §2]).
     11 Propinquity := the state of being near in space or in time. Handelman used this term to

refer to the fact that the rings between a Bass ring R and its integral closure R̃ are rather “close”
to one another.
     12 Recall that two R-modules M and N are said to be in the same genus if M            ∼
                                                                                        m = Nm for
every maximal ideal m ⊂ R.
16                                          T. Y. LAM


R is always Gorenstein, but it need not be Bass. Bass’s result, in this case, shows
that (1), (2), (3) above are in fact equivalent, and, by the results of Dade and
Heller-Reiner, they amount to the fact that the order of G is square-free (see also
[Gr: Th. 8.1]). In other words, |G| being square-free is the necessary and sufficient
condition for the integral group ring Z G to be a Bass ring.

    To any perceptive reader of the two papers [B3 ], [B6 ], there should be little
doubt that one of the objectives Bass had in mind for his theory of Gorenstein rings
and the decompositions of torsionfree modules was the potential applications to
integral representation theory. Bass’s explicit mention (in [B6 : §7]) of the R = Z G
example in the paragraph above was a clear indication of his vision in this direction.
As it turned out, the task of carrying out the program of applying Gorenstein
(and Bass) rings to integral representation theory was to fall on the shoulders of
researchers on representation modules in the Russian School.

    Of course, in integral representation theory, the rings to be considered are
no longer commutative; but in a sense they are sufficiently close to commutative
rings. To put ourselves into this new setting, we start with a Dedekind ring R
with quotient field K, and consider an R-order Λ in a finite-dimensional separable
K-algebra A. In this setting, we shall be exclusively concerned with (say, left)
Λ-lattices; that is, f.g. left Λ-modules L which embed into the A-module K ⊗R L
by the natural map). Following Curtis and Reiner [CR: §37], we say that Λ is a
Gorenstein order if the left regular module Λ Λ has the following “weakly injective”
property: for any Λ-lattices M and N , any Λ-exact sequence
                                    0→Λ→M →N →0
splits.13 We then define Bass orders by a hereditary property: Λ is said to be a
Bass order if every R-order in A containing Λ is a Gorenstein order.

    Comparing these definitions with the traditionally well known ones for heredi-
tary orders and maximal orders, we can easily verify the following hierarchy:
{Maximal Orders} ⊂ {Hereditary Orders} ⊂ {Bass Orders} ⊂ {Gorenstein Orders},
where, as indicated, each inclusion is proper. In parallel to the properties (1),
(2) and (3) in the commutative case, one can now consider the following three
properties of a given R-order Λ:

     (a) Every left ideal of Λ is generated by two elements.
     (b) Λ is a Bass order.
     (c) Every indecomposable Λ-lattice is isomorphic to a left ideal of Λ.

    Shortly after the appearance of [B6 ], Russian workers in integral representation
theory mounted an ambitious program to try to determine the exact relationships
between the three properties above in the setting of noncommutative R-orders.
The definitive results were obtained around 1966-67. In [Ro], Roĭter showed that
(a) ⇒ (b), and in [DKR], Drozd, Kirichenko, and Roĭter showed that (b) ⇒ (c).
These results are the best possible, since in general, (b) does not imply (a), nor
    13 This is actually just an equivalent way to say that id( Λ) ≤ 1: one can see this, essentially,
                                                              Λ
by applying (1) ⇔ (3) in (4.4). It can also be seen that Λ being a Gorenstein order is a left/right
symmetric property [CR: (37.8)]; hence the omission of any reference to side.
            BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                       17


does (c) imply (b). A detailed exposition on the proofs of the implications (a) ⇒
(b) ⇒ (c) can be found in §37 of the book of Curtis and Reiner [CR], on which our
present discussion is based.

     The results of Roĭter, Drozd and Kirichenko are quite deep, involving rather
subtle analysis of the decompositions of Λ-lattices. But it was clearly the paradigm
of the results of Bass in the commutative case that had guided the Russians in their
work in this phase of integral representation theory. Subsequently, Bass orders were
used as a fundamental tool in the work of Drozd-Roĭter and Drozd-Kirichenko in
their approaches to the characterization of orders of finite representation type (the
corresponding work on group rings over rings of algebraic integers having been
completed earlier by H. Jacobinski).

    In another direction, we should mention that the idea of Gorenstein rings has
also found recent applications in noncommutative algebraic geometry: a notion of
(noncommutative) “Auslander-Gorenstein rings” has been introduced and studied
by K. Ajitabh, S. P. Smith, and J. J. Zhang (see [ASZ]).

     Today, in no small measure due to the influence of Bass’s paper, Gorenstein
rings have lived up to their “ubiquity” billing, and are widely used in number theory,
arithmetic and algebraic geometry, commutative (and noncommutative) algebra,
theory of invariants, and combinatorics. Even the work of Andrew Wiles [W] on
elliptic curves and modular forms leading to his spectacular proof of Fermat’s Last
Theorem made use of Gorenstein rings at several crucial points: in the Appendix,
in Ch. 2 (§1), and then in Ch. 3 on the estimates for the Selmer group. Recall
that it was exactly Wiles’s earlier attempts to use Euler systems for obtaining
the upper bounds on the Selmer group that had led to the “fatal flaw” in his
first proof of FLT announced in Cambridge on June 23, 1993. In 1994, finally
realizing that the Euler system approach was irreparable, Wiles returned to his
original approach in estimating the Selmer group using ideas from Iwasawa Theory.
Basically, in [W: Ch. 3], Wiles needed to show that certain minimal Hecke rings,
which are known to be Gorenstein rings, are indeed complete intersections. This
was eventually accomplished jointly with Richard Taylor in [TW]. The role played
by commutative algebra (and Gorenstein rings in particular) in Wiles’s paper was
described vividly in the following words of his [W: p. 451]:
       “The turning point in this and indeed in the whole proof came in
       the Spring of 1991. In searching for a clue from commutative al-
       gebra I had been particularly struck some years earlier by a paper
       of Kunz. I had already needed to verify that the Hecke rings were
       Gorenstein in order to compute the congruences developed in Chap-
       ter 2. . . . Kunz’s paper suggested the use of an invariant (the η-
       invariant . . . ) which I saw could be used to test for isomorphisms
       between Gorenstein rings. A different invariant (the p/p2-invariant
       . . . ) I had already observed could be used to test for isomorphisms
       between complete intersections. . . . Not long afterwards I realized
       that, unlikely though it seemed at first, the equality of these invari-
       ants was actually a criterion for a Gorenstein ring to be a complete
       intersection.”
18                                    T. Y. LAM


    For related literature, see also Lenstra’s paper [Len] on complete intersections
and Gorenstein rings. In this paper, Lenstra sharpened Wiles’s criterion (in the
Appendix of [W]) for a finite O-free local Gorenstein algebra T over a complete
discrete valuation ring O to be a complete intersection. (Lenstra was able to
remove the Gorenstein assumption on T .)

                               Part II: Ring Theory

     §5. Semiperfect Rings as Generalizations of Semiprimary Rings
     In Part II of this paper, we come to Bass’s work in noncommutative ring the-
ory. As we have mentioned in the Introduction, Bass’s maiden work [B1 ], developed
from his Chicago thesis in 1959, is a ring-theoretic paper dealing with the homo-
logical generalization of semiprimary rings. This work turned out to be one of the
most influential ring theory papers written in that period, as can be partly gauged
from the following fact. In L. Small’s collected reviews [Sm] of ring theory papers
published in Math. Reviews in 1940-79, an average paper got at most a few cross
citations from other reviews, but Bass’s paper [B1 ] managed to pull as many as
29! Usually, a reviewer would only cite a paper in order to indicate the source of
a crucial topic or an important idea; the fact that, in its twenty years of existence,
[B1 ] drew as many 29 cross citations from other reviews was almost without parallel
in [Sm].

      What makes [B1 ] a masterpiece was the fact that it wove together many of the
themes in ring theory and homological algebra that were being developed at that
time. On the ring theory side, these themes include: the Krull-Schmidt Theorem
(Azumaya version), chain conditions (suitably restricted), maximal and minimal
submodules (existence questions), the Jacobson radical (nilpotency questions and
lifting of idempotents), and Nakayama’s Lemma (for general, not necessarily f.g.,
modules). On the side of homological algebra (a pretty new subject in 1959), the
themes include: projective, injective, and flat modules, projective covers, “Ext” and
“Tor” functors, and all kinds of homological dimensions. Quoting from Bass’s com-
ments on “Theorem P” in [B1 ], “this result provides one of those gratifying instances
in which several ostensibly diverse notions were shown to be intimately related.”
Indeed, it seems clear in retrospect that it was this remarkable bridge-building role
played by the various results in [B1 ] which helped secure it a permanent place in
the ring theory literature. Only a few years after the appearance of [B1 ], the key
ingredients of the paper (the theory of perfect and semiperfect rings) were incor-
porated into a standard textbook [L], Lambek’s “Lectures on Rings and Modules”,
ca. 1966. Today, perfect and semiperfect rings continue to be used extensively in a
wide variety of ring-theoretic settings.

    In this and the next two sections, we’ll give a report on Bass’s paper [B1 ] and its
impact on noncommutative ring theory. In order to keep the size of these sections
within bounds, however, we shall only survey below the first part of [B1 ] on perfect
and semiperfect rings, and will not try to cover its second part on the finitistic
homological dimensions of rings.

   For the reader’s convenience, we first recall a couple of basic definitions. In
noncommutative ring theory, a ring R is said to be semiprimary if its Jacobson
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                 19


radical rad(R) is nilpotent, and the quotient ring R/rad(R) is (artinian) semisim-
ple. Rings of this type were well known in classical ring theory, and had been
studied in part as a viable generalization of one-sided artinian rings by K. Asano,
G. Azumaya and T. Nakayama, among others. With the advent of the new style of
algebra in the 1950s, homological properties of such rings also attracted attention,
and had been explored, for instance, in some of the papers in the “Nagoya series”
(ca. 1955-56) on the homological dimensions of modules and rings. Bass had the
genius to recognize that the artinian condition on R/rad(R) is important in its
own right, and later (in [B9 : p. 504]) defined a ring R to be semilocal if it satisfies
this condition. In the commutative case, this condition amounts to the finiteness
of the number of maximal ideals in R, so Bass’s definition of semilocal rings agrees
with the usual one in commutative algebra. For noncommutative rings, however,
“semilocal” is no longer equivalent to the finiteness of the number of (one-sided or
two-sided) maximal ideals. Ring theorists now know that Bass had chosen the right
definition (as well as the right name!) for an important class of rings.

     Like semiprimary rings, the semiperfect rings and left (right) perfect rings in-
troduced in [B1 ] are special cases of semilocal rings. Bass was led to these rings
partly by the classical idea of an injective hull due to Eckmann and Schöpf. In
general, an injective hull of a module M is an injective module I containing M as
a large (or essential ) submodule, in the sense that:
                      ∀ submodule S ⊆ I, S ∩ M = 0 =⇒ S = 0.
Eckmann and Schöpf showed that (over any ring) an injective hull for M always
exists, and is unique up to an isomorphism over M . In [Ei], Eilenberg initiated a
notion of a minimal epimorphism from a projective module to M , and used this
notion to study minimal resolutions, homological dimensions and syzygies. Bass
observed that, by slightly changing Eilenberg’s definition, one gets a precise dual
of the notion of an injective hull: according to Bass, a projective cover of a module
M is a projective module P with an epimorphism f : P → M such that ker(f ) is
small (or superfluous) in P in the sense that:
                   ∀ submodule S ⊆ P,          S + ker(f ) = P =⇒ S = P.
Such a projective cover for M is easily seen to be unique; the only problem is that
it may not exist. For instance, in the category of Z-modules, the only objects with
projective covers (in the above sense) are the free abelian groups.

    The task of studying the existence of projective covers in module categories
was taken up by Bass [B1 ], who defined a ring R to be left perfect (resp. left
semiperfect) if every left R-module (resp. cyclic left R-module) has a projective
cover.14 The main work to be done was that of characterizing such rings in terms
of other interesting conditions.

     In this section, we shall focus on the semiperfect case. Here, Bass’s major result
is the following.


     14 The adjective “perfect” is due to Eilenberg, who used the term “perfect categories” in [Ei]

for categories of modules possessing projective covers.
20                                          T. Y. LAM


(5.1) Theorem. For any ring R, the following are equivalent:
(1) R is left semiperfect;
(2) Every f.g. left R-module has a projective cover; 15
(3) R is semilocal, and idempotents in R/rad(R) can be lifted to idempotents in R.
In case R is a commutative ring, the above conditions are also equivalent to:
(4) R is a finite direct product of commutative local rings.

     Note that (1) ⇔ (3) shows, in particular, the somewhat surprising left/right
symmetry of semiperfect rings.16 The second condition in (3) was already quite
well known in ring theory at that time, and had been studied by Kaplansky, Ja-
cobson, and Zelinsky, among others. For instance, if rad(R) is a nil ideal, this
condition is always satisfied (see [L: p. 72, Prop. 1]). Thus, semiperfect rings in-
clude all semiprimary rings (which in turn include all one-sided artinian rings). It
is in this sense that semiperfect rings (and the 1-sided perfect rings to be discussed
later) are homological generalizations of the classically well known semiprimary
rings.

    The equivalence (1) ⇔ (4) in Theorem 5.1 shows that, for commutative rings,
the notion of semiperfect rings has essentially nothing new to add to the existing
theory. But the interesting case is that of noncommutative semiperfect rings. Since
a major source of noncommutative rings is the class of endomorphism rings of
modules, it is significant to ask when such endomorphism rings are semiperfect. The
answer to this question is contained in the following result, which is a remarkable
extension of the well-known classical theorem that the endomorphism ring of a
module of finite length is always semiprimary.

(5.2) Theorem. Let M be a right module over a ring S. Then the endomorphism
ring EndS (M ) is semiperfect iff M has a finite Azumaya decomposition, that is, a
decomposition M = M1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Mn such that each endomorphism ring EndS (Mi )
is local.

    Although this result was not explicitly stated in [Ba1 ], it can be proved easily
using the techniques of that paper. (An explicit proof can be found in [La3 : (23.6)].)
In some sense, (5.2) shows the “ubiquity” of semiperfect rings. For instance, for
any injective module MS , if M has finite uniform dimension, then EndS (M ) is
semiperfect (and conversely). As a special case of (5.2), we also see that a ring R is
semiperfect iff the regular module RR has a finite Azumaya decomposition; or, in
terms of idempotents, iff there is a decomposition 1 = e1 + · · · + en where the ei ’s
are mutually orthogonal idempotents with each ei Rei a local ring. The existence of
such a decomposition makes it possible to generalize a considerable amount of the
elementary theory of artinian rings to a semiperfect ring R, including, for instance:
the classification of f.g. projective R-modules, the construction of projective covers
for f.g. R-modules, the definition of a Cartan matrix, block decomposition and
      15 It is worth noting that, according to later work of F. Sandomierski ([Sa ], [Mue]; see also
                                                                                  1
[La4 : (24.3)]), this condition (2) is also equivalent to the following: (2)′ Every simple right R-
module has a projective cover. In a same vein, Sandomierski proved that a ring R is right perfect
iff every every semisimple right R-module has a projective cover.
      16 In fact, the left-right symmetric characterization of semiperfect rings in (5.1)(3) is often

used as their definition in the literature: see, for instance, [La3 : p. 346].
               BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                    21


basic ring for R, etc. These are parts of the foundational material for the theory of
artinian rings, first developed (by Brauer, Osima and others) in the context of group
algebras of finite groups for applications to the theory of modular representations.
It is gratifying to see that a large part of this well-known classical theory can be
carried over verbatim to semiperfect rings.

     The ultimate justification for the introduction of the class of semiperfect rings
lies in the fact that, besides semiprimary rings, there are also many other natural
classes of rings which turn out to be semiperfect. Let us make a list of some such
classes below.
     • If NS is any module of finite uniform dimension over a ring S and M is its
       injective hull, then the endomorphism ring End(MR ) is semiperfect. (This
       is essentially a rehash of the remark on injective modules we made in the
       last paragraph.)
     • If a semilocal ring R is 1-sided self-injective, then R is semiperfect; see
       [La5 : (13.4)].
     • Certain semigroup rings called Kupisch rings by H. Sato are semiperfect;
       see [Sat: (5.1)].
     • Any right serial ring (that is, a ring R such that RR is a direct sum of
       uniserial modules) is a semiperfect ring; see, e.g., [F2 : p. 81].
     • It is well-known to researchers in duality theory that if a ring R admits a
       Morita duality into some other ring S, then R and S must be semiperfect
       rings. Indeed, if U is an (S, R)-bimodule defining the duality, then there is a
       duality between the Serre subcategories of U -reflexive right R-modules and
       left S-modules. Since (left) S-modules have injective hulls, it is not difficult
       to check from the above duality that f.g. (right) R-modules have projective
       covers. Thus, R, and hence also S, must be semiperfect rings. This basic
       observation is due to Barbara Osofsky. As a special case, it follows that any
       cogenerator ring17 is a semiperfect ring.
     • More generally, Sandomierski [Sa2 : p. 335] has shown that right linearly com-
       pact rings are semiperfect, and Azumaya [Az1 ], Osofsky [Os] and others have
       shown that right PF (pseudo-Frobenius) rings18 are also semiperfect.
   The notion of semiperfect rings has also been generalized in several directions.
The following are two of them.
     • First, prompted by Bass’s characterization (5.1)(2) for a semiperfect ring,
       ring-theorists have come up with a slightly more general notion: a ring R is
       said to be F -semiperfect if every finitely presented left R-module has a pro-
       jective cover. This terminology is due to Oberst and Schneider [OS]: “F ”
       here stands for “finite”. Clearly, every semiperfect ring is F -semiperfect. In
       parallel to (5.1)(3), there is the following characterization of an F -semiperfect
       ring: R is F -semiperfect iff it is semiregular ; that is, idempotents of R/rad(R)

     17 A ring R is called a cogenerator ring if R is a cogenerator both as a left and as a right

R-module. A cogenerator ring is also known as a Morita ring in the literature.
     18 A ring R is called a right PF ring if any faithful right R-module is a generator. For a list of

many other characterizations of such rings, see [La5 : (19.26)]. The cogenerator rings in Footnote
(17) are precisely the 2-sided PF-rings.
22                                        T. Y. LAM


       can be lifted to R, and the epimorphic image R/rad(R) of R is a von Neu-
       mann regular ring (instead of a semisimple ring). (See, e.g. [OS: (1.2)],
       and [Ni3 , Ni4 ].) There is a large supply of such rings. In fact, if M is any
       quasi-injective module,19 then the endomorphism ring EndR (M ) is always
       a semiregular ring. This fact, first proved by Faith and Utumi [FU], is one of
       the underpinnings for the Findlay-Lambek-Utumi theory of maximal rings
       of quotients; a self-contained proof of it can be found in [La5 : (13.1)].
     • In the theory of direct sum decompositions of modules, there is an important
       class of rings called “exchange rings” that are formally christened by Warfield
       in [Wa1 ]. (A ring R is said to be an exchange ring if RR satisfies the exchange
       property introduced in the work of Crawley and Jónsson [CJ]. For more
       details on (and characterizations of) such rings, see [Ni4 ].) The following
       hierarchy shows exactly how semiregular rings and exchange rings compare
       with semiperfect rings:
         {Semiperfect Rings} ⊂ {Semiregular Rings} ⊂ {Exchange Rings},
        where the second inclusion was shown by Warfield ([Wa1 : Th. 3]; see also
        [Ni4 : Cor. (2.3)]). Here, both inclusions are proper, as indicated. It turns
        out that the main difference between semiperfect rings and exchange rings
        lies in a finiteness condition. In fact, by combining Nicholson’s results [Ni1 :
        (4.3)] and [Ni4 : (1.9)], one sees that semiperfect rings are just the exchange
        rings which do not have infinite sets of nonzero orthogonal idempotents; this
        is stated as (8.4C) in Faith’s recent book [Fa3 ]. Note that this statement is
        much easier to prove if we replace the word “exchange rings” by “semiregular
        rings”, since it is well-known that, whenever idempotents can be lifted from
        R/rad(R) to R, any countable set of nonzero orthogonal idempotents in
        R/rad(R) can be lifted to a similar set in R [La3 : (21.25], and that a von
        Neumann regular ring is semisimple if it has no infinite sets of nonzero
        orthogonal idempotents ([Go1 : (2.16)], [La5 : Exer. 6.29]).
     Exchange rings are worthy of study in ring theory since they generalize semiper-
fect rings, and they form a fairly broad class of rings. Some known facts about
semiperfect rings turn out to be true for exchange rings; the proofs of them are
sometimes clearer when they are expressed in the context of exchange rings. For
instance, Müller’s well-known result [Mue] that any L  projective (right) module over
                                                                                2
a semiperfect ring R is isomorphic to a direct sum        i ei R (where ei = ei ∈ R )
generalizes to, and is quite easy to prove over, any exchange ring R; see [Wa1 : Th. 1].
Apply this to a local ring R and you’ll retrieve Kaplansky’s classical result (men-
tioned in §1) that any projective R-module is free.

    Finally, we should mention that the notion of semiperfect rings has also been
successfully extended to a module-theoretic setting: a module M over a ring R is
said to be semiperfect if every quotient of M has a projective cover. (Thus, R is
semiperfect iff the module R R is.) The theory of semiperfect modules was initiated
in the projective case in Mares [M] and Kasch-Mares [KM], and has been studied
further by Nicholson [Ni2 , Ni3 ], and Azumaya [Az2 , Az4 , Az5 ], among others. For
a detailed treatment of semiperfect modules in the general case, see the textbook
     19 A module M is said to be quasi-injective if, for any submodule N ⊆ M , any homomorphism

from N to M can be extended to an endomorphism of M . Needless to say, quasi-injective modules
include all injective ones.
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                 23


of Kasch [Ka]. Ever since [B1 ] appeared in 1960, semiperfect rings (and modules)
have been further studied and extensively utilized in many papers in ring theory.
To reflect this trend, I have devoted the last chapter of my ring theory graduate
text [La3 ] to an introductory exposition on the theory of (perfect and) semiperfect
rings.

                      §6. Perfect Rings and Restricted DCC
     In this section, we come to Bass’s remarkable characterizations of left perfect
rings; recall that these are, by definition, rings all of whose left modules have
projective covers. Since left perfect rings are obviously semiperfect, we expect that
one of the characterizations should be a strengthening of the condition (3) in (5.1);
this is given by the condition (2) below. The other conditions will be commented
upon later.

(6.1) Theorem. For any ring R with Jacobson radical J = rad(R), the following
are equivalent:
(1) R is left perfect;
(2) R is semilocal, and J is left T -nilpotent, that is, for any a1 , a2 , . . . ∈ J,
a1 a2 · · · an = 0 for some n;
(3) R is semilocal, and every nonzero left R-module has a maximal submodule;
(4) Every flat left R-module is projective;
(5) R satisfies DCC on principal right ideals;
(6) Any right R-module satisfies DCC on cyclic submodules;
(7) R is semilocal, and every nonzero right R-module has a minimal submodule;
(7)′ R has no infinite sets of nonzero orthogonal idempotents, and every nonzero
right R-module has a minimal submodule.

    It is worth pointing out that left perfect rings are interesting mostly when they
are not semiprime. In fact, as soon as a left perfect ring R is semiprime, then R is
semisimple; see, e.g. [La3 : (10.24)].

     According to Bass, the “T ” in “T -nilpotency” in (2) stands for “transfinite”.
Note that this condition in (2) comes somewhere between J being nilpotent and
J being nil.20 Similar nil-ness conditions have appeared before in the work of
Levitzki on the Levitzki radical, but Bass was the first one to realize the role of
T -nilpotency in the study of modules and restricted chain conditions on 1-sided
ideals. As it turned out, the successful use of the T -nilpotency condition played a
pivotal role in the proof of (6.1). Results such as (1.6) showed further the efficacy
of the T -nilpotency conditions.

     We shall now comment on the other conditions in Theorem (6.1). Along with
(1), the condition (4) is of a homological nature; it can be slightly rephrased as
follows.

(4)′ Every left R-module has the same flat as projective dimension.
     20 In particular, the characterization (2) implies immediately that semiprimary rings are both

right and left perfect. In general, however, right perfect and left perfect are not equivalent
conditions, as was already pointed out by Bass.
24                                       T. Y. LAM


Since, in general, flat modules are precisely direct limits of projective modules (by
the theorem of Lazard and Govorov), (4) can also be stated in the following form:

(4)′′ Direct limits of projective left R-modules are projective.

Bass’s proof for (4)′′ ⇒ (5) is based on a very ingenious analysis of the left R-
module with generators x1 , x2 , . . . , and relations xn = an xn+1 for all n, where
a1 , a2 , . . . are given elements in R.

     Note that the first four conditions in (6.1) ((1)–(4)) are conditions on left R-
modules, while the last four conditions ((5)–(7)′ ) are on right ones ! This switch
from left modules to right modules, albeit not new for Bass (see Footnote (9)), is
in fact one of the inherent peculiar features of his Theorem (6.1). Unfortunately,
because of this unusual switch of sides, Theorem (6.1) is often misquoted in the
literature, sometimes even in authoritative sources: see, for instance, [KS: Thm. 2,
p. 57]. In a couple of standard textbooks, Bass’s left (resp. right) T -nilpotency
condition was renamed the “right (resp. left) vanishing condition”; in another text-
book, the author simply switched Bass’s definitions of left and right T -nilpotency
— and did so without even alerting the reader to the difference! All of this ev-
idently further compounded the confusion. We hereby urge all future authors to
exercise restraint in changing existing definitions, and to check their statements
very carefully when quoting Bass’s Theorem (6.1).

    While clearly (2) and (5) in (6.1) are purely ring-theoretic conditions, Bass’s
proof of (2) =⇒ (5) was routed through the homological condition (4) (or its equiv-
alent versions (4)′ , (4)′′ ). This raised the challenging question whether it is possible
to give a direct proof for (2) =⇒ (5) without using any homological algebra.21 Such
a proof was eventually found by Rentschler in [Re].

    Let us now discuss in detail the interesting condition (5), which is a natural
weakening of the usual artinian condition on right ideals. Here, Kaplansky’s ideas
played a key role. In his work with Arens on the topological representations of
algebras in the late 40s, Kaplansky [K1 ] was motivated to consider the condition
stipulating the stabilization of all chains of the form
                                 aR ⊇ a2 R ⊇ a3 R ⊇ · · ·
for all elements a in a ring R. This condition was shown to be left/right sym-
metric many years later by Dischinger, and defines the class of strongly π-regular
rings. We will not try to justify the somewhat clumsy terminology here, for this
can be done only by making a digression into some other definitions not essential
for our purposes. Suffice it to say that, in the case of commutative rings R, strong
π-regularity amounts to R having Krull dimension 0. And, as examples of non-
commutative strongly π-regular rings, Kaplansky mentioned the class of algebraic
algebras over a field.

     In an appendix to [K1 ], Kaplansky pointed out that it would also be natural
to consider the DCC for all principal right ideals in a ring, that is, the condition
(5) in Theorem 6.1. Kaplansky noted that the Russian mathematician Gertschikoff
     21 The reverse implication (5) =⇒ (2) can indeed be done directly without invoking homo-

logical tools; see, for instance, the exposition in [La3 : p. 369].
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                               25


had considered rings satisfying this condition as far back as 1940, and obtained
characterizations of such rings that are without nonzero nilpotent elements.22 In
retrospect, this result of Gertschikoff was certainly a harbinger for the equivalence of
the conditions (2) and (5) in Bass’s Theorem 6.1. By a rather strange coincidence,
1959-61 turned out to be the years in which the minimum condition (5) for principal
right ideals was destined to blossom: during this period, along with the publication
of [B1 ] came two papers of Faith [Fa1 ] and three papers of Szász [Sz] on the same
topic. Bass invented the term “left perfect” for his rings (after Eilenberg), while
Faith used the English acronym “MP-ring”, and Szász introduced the German
acronym “MHR-ring.” Carl Faith told me that, in his first meeting with Bass in
the early 60s, they compared notes on their respective works on rings with DCC
on 1-sided ideals, but found surprisingly that what they did with these rings had
almost nothing in common!

     Going beyond Bass’s paper [B1 ], we should mention several significant results
obtained later by other authors, which were directly inspired by Theorem 6.1.
Prior to the publication of [B1 ], Chase had proved in his Chicago thesis that, over
any semiprimary ring R, DCC holds for f.g. submodules of any (left or right) R-
module.23 Prompted by this, Bass asked if, in any left perfect ring, f.g. right ideals
satisfy the DCC. This was affirmed in 1969 by Björk ([Bj1 ], see also [La4 : (23.3)])
who proved the amazing result that, whenever a module (over any ring) satisfies
DCC on cyclic submodules, it also satisfies the DCC on f.g. submodules. In partic-
ular, this extends Chase’s result to left perfect rings, showing that in the condition
(6) in Theorem 6.1, the word “cyclic” can be replaced by “f.g.”. One year later,
Jonah [Jo] added “infinitely many” more equivalent conditions to the list in (6.1):

(0)n Any left R-module satisfies ACC on its n-generated submodules.

(Here, n is any natural number.) Remarkably, these new characterization of left
perfect rings are in terms of ascending chain conditions; also, we are now back full
circle to left R-modules! Note that, in particular, Jonah’s result implies “Rings
with the minimum condition for principal right ideals have the maximum condition
for principal left ideals.” This was, in fact, the title of Jonah’s paper [Jo].

     To continue our discussion on left perfect rings, we take another look at the
list of equivalent conditions in (6.1). Since the condition (7) is equivalent to the
ostensibly weaker condition (7)′ , an obvious question one can ask is whether (3)
can likewise be weakened to:

(3)′ R has no infinite sets of nonzero orthogonal idempotents, and every nonzero
left R-module has a maximal submodule.

Note that this condition is in a way “dual” to the condition (7)′ (just as (3) is dual
to (7)), so it seems tempting to add (3)′ to the list of equivalent conditions in (6.1).
An open problem proposed in [B1 ] is, indeed, whether (3)′ is a characterization for
left-perfectness of a ring R. Some authors have referred to an affirmative answer to
this as “Bass’s Conjecture”, although in fact Bass merely raised the question (see
     22 In fact, Gertschikoff’s characterization worked more generally for rings possibly without

an identity element.
     23 For a self-contained proof of this, see Faith’s paper [Fa : p. 189].
                                                                 2
26                                    T. Y. LAM


[B1 : p. 471]). The answer to this question is possibly a bit surprising: it is “yes”
in the commutative case, and “no” in the general case, as is shown by Koifman
[Ko], and partly by Cozzens, Hamsher, and Renault. To give an idea of how these
conclusions were obtained, we proceed as follows.

     In view of (3) and (3)′ , it is of interest to isolate the condition: “any nonzero
left R-module has a maximal submodule”. Let us say that R is a left-max ring
if this condition is satisfied. It is not hard to see that any left-max ring has a
left T -nilpotent Jacobson radical [La4 : (24.6)]. In the commutative case, one has
the following characterization of a (left)-max ring, due to Hamsher, Renault and
Koifman; see [La4 : (24.9)].

(6.2) Theorem. A commutative ring R is (left)-max iff rad(R) is T -nilpotent
and R/rad(R) is a von Neumann regular ring.

    It follows, in particular, from this result that a commutative max-ring R is
semiregular. If, in addition, R has no infinite sets of nonzero orthogonal idempo-
tents, then R/rad(R) must be semisimple by an argument we gave in §5. Since
rad(R) is T -nilpotent, R is perfect, which answers Bass’s question affirmatively for
commutative rings.

     To treat Bass’s question in the general case, we use the notion of a left V -ring
— a ring whose simple left modules are injective. A well-known characterization
for such a ring R is that every left R-module has a zero radical ([La5 : (3.75)]);
in particular, R must be a left-max ring. Using differential algebra, Cozzens [Co]
constructed remarkable examples of left V -domains that are not division rings; such
domains clearly satisfy (3)′ above, but are not left perfect rings, thus answering
Bass’s question in the negative. Moreover, Cozzens’s rings are simple, principal
left/right ideal domains. The emergence of rings of this type served as an important
turning point for the theory of simple noetherian rings; see, e.g. the book of Cozzens
and Faith [CF].

    Many other characterizations of left perfect rings are known. Without any
attempt at completeness, let us mention a few below.
     • P. A. Griffith, B. Zimmermann-Huisgen and others have characterized left
       perfect rings in terms of conditions similar to (6.1)(4). In the homological
       theory of modules, an R-module P is said to be locally projective if every
       R-epimorphism f : Q −→ P is locally split (in the sense that, for every
       p ∈ P , there exists g ∈ HomR (P, Q) such that f g(p) = p). It is easy to see
       that such a module P must be flat, so the locally projective modules form
       a class between the class of projective modules and that of flat modules.
       In [Zi2 ], Zimmermann-Huisgen showed that a ring R is left perfect iff every
       locally projective left R-module is projective. This is, therefore, a variant of
       the criterion (4) for left perfect rings.
     • In Theorem 10 loc. cit., Zimmermann-Huisgen has also characterized left
       perfect rings in terms of ℵ1 -separable modules; these are modules P with
       the property that any countable subset of P is contained in a countably
       generated direct summand of P .
             BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                       27


     • In the work of Harada-Ishii [HI], Yamagata [Ya], Zimmermann-Huisgen and
       Zimmermann [ZZ1 ], some characterizations of left perfect rings are given in
       terms of the exchange property of projective left R-modules.
     • It seems to be a folklore result that a ring R is left perfect (resp. semiper-
       fect) iff every left R-module P (resp. f.g. left R-module P ) is “supple-
       mented”, that is, every submodule of P has an addition complement. (See,
       e.g. [Wis: (42.6), (43.9)].) Recently, Keskin [Ke] has further extended these
       characterizations by using the more general notion of ⊕-supplemented mod-
       ules.
     • Optimally, characterizations for left perfect rings should be generalizable to
       characterizations for the endomorphism ring of a given module to be left per-
       fect. Some results in this direction can be found in [AF2 : §29], [Wis: (43.10)],
       and [Az3 ].
     In closing, we should mention the fact that much of Bass’s work on left perfect
rings can be extended to functor categories. In general, if A is a small additive
category, we may view A as a generalization of a ring (it is a “ring with several
objects”), and even more significantly, we may view Add(A, Ab) (the category of
additive functors from A into the category of abelian groups) as a generalization
of the category of modules over a ring. In view of this, it is not surprising that
various module-theoretic notions can be generalized to notions concerning functors
in Add(A, Ab). As it turns out, after defining flat functors, projective covers of
functors, and DCC for f.g. subfunctors, etc., one can completely “transfer” Bass’s
Theorem (6.1) into a theorem on the functor category Add(A, Ab). This leads then
to the notion of a left (resp. right) perfect additive category A. For a full account of
all this (as well as various other relations between perfect rings and model-theoretic
algebra), see the book of Jensen and Lenzing [JL].

    Now all of this is not just generalization for generalization’s sake! For instance,
one can apply it back to the case when A is a certain additive subcategory of a
module category over some ring R. By doing so, one is sometimes able to make
interesting connections, and even prove nontrivial results. For instance, if A is
the category of all finitely presented modules over a ring R, it turns out that the
study of the perfectness of A leads to various insights about (and characteriza-
tions of) the so-called pure semisimple rings. For a detailed formulation of this,
see [JL: Thm. B.14]. As a matter of fact, we shall return to the theme of pure
semisimple rings in the next section in the context of Auslander’s representation
theory of artinian rings.

    Needless to say, none of the work discussed above would have been possible
without the pioneering effort of Bass in [B1 ].

               §7. Perfect Rings and Representation Theory
     In mathematics, a good notion or a good theorem often has a way of finding
surprising connections to things to which it might have seemed unrelated at first. As
it turned out, Bass’s notion of perfect rings and his various results on them provide
such an example. The unexpected connections are to the representation theory of
artinian rings, and the study of the general decomposition theory of modules into
direct sums. In this section, we’ll give a short account on some of these connections;
28                                     T. Y. LAM


our discussion will culminate in an open question in noncommutative ring theory
which has remained unanswered to this date. I thank N. V. Dung for suggesting
that I include such a discussion here, and for explaining to me the main results and
references in this area of research.

      To set the stage for our discussion, we first recall the following basic notion in
representation theory. A ring R is said to be of finite representation type (FRT) if it
is left artinian and there are only finitely many (isomorphism types of) f.g. indecom-
posable left R-modules. According to a result of Eisenbud and Griffith [EG], this
notion is left/right symmetric, so we are justified in suppressing the word “left” or
“right” in referring to rings of FRT. The study of these rings, in the form of finite-
dimensional algebras over fields, goes back a long way to Brauer, Thrall, Kasch,
Kneser, Kupisch, and others. It turns out that rings of FRT have a rather subtle
relationship to Bass’s perfect rings, which we’ll now try to explain.

    We start with a notion introduced by Anderson and Fuller [AF1 ] in the  Ldecom-
position theory of modules. A decomposition of an R-module M into              i∈I Mi
(Mi 6= 0) is said to “complement direct summands” if, for eachLdirect summand
N of M , there exists a subset J ⊆ I such that M = N ⊕ j∈J Mj . (Note
that if such a decomposition for M exists, the summands Mi are necessarily inde-
composable.) Using this terminology and going beyond [B1 ], Anderson and Fuller
obtained in [AF1 ] (ca. 1972) the following new characterization of left perfect (and
semiperfect) rings:

(7.1) Theorem. A ring R is left perfect (resp. semiperfect) iff every projective
left R-module (resp. f.g. projective left R-module) has a direct sum decomposition
that complements direct summands, iff the free left R-module R ⊕ R ⊕ · · · (resp.
R ⊕ R ) has a direct sum decomposition that complements direct summands.

     In view of this theorem, it is natural to ask when does every left R-module
admit a decomposition that complements direct summands. It turns out that the
answer to this question also involvesL  left perfect rings, albeit in different way. Given
a ring R, let R U be the direct sum       i Ui , where the Ui ’s consist of one isomorphic
copy of each finitely presented left R-module. Now let E be the subring (without
identity) of EndR (U ) consisting of endomorphisms f such that Ui f = 0 for almost
all i; E is called the “left functor ring” of R (for reasons that we shall not elaborate
on here). In 1976, building upon the results of Auslander and Harada, Fuller [Ful]
proved the following remarkable result (see also Simson’s paper [Si1 ]).

(7.2) Theorem. For any ring R, the following are equivalent:
(1) Every left R-module has a decomposition that complements direct summands;
(2) Every left R-module is a direct sum of f.g. submodules;
(3) The left functor ring E associated to R (defined above) is left perfect.
According to a theorem of Chase, these conditions (specifically (2)) imply that R is
a left artinian ring.

    In (3) above, of course, we’ll need to use the notion of a left perfect ring
without an identity. This is not a big problem; in fact, with essentially the same
definition of left perfectness, Harada [H] has shown that much of Theorem 6.1 can
be proved for rings without 1 but “with enough idempotents” (see also [Wis: §49]).
             BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                           29


The condition (2) in (7.2) expresses a very desirable module-theoretic property
(arbitrary left modules can be “constructed” from f.g. ones) that has also been
studied by Auslander [Au2 ], Gruson and Jensen [GJ] (and many others in the
commutative case). In [GJ], it was shown that (2) is equivalent to R having “pure
left global dimension zero”, that is, if every pure short exact sequence of left R-
modules splits.24 In 1977, Simson [Si2 ] introduced the shorter term “left pure
semisimple” for rings R with this property, and later, expanding on the work of
Chase and Warfield, Zimmermann-Huisgen [Zi2 ] showed that the property (2) is
also equivalent to:

(4) Every left R-module is a direct sum of indecomposable submodules.

Therefore, any of (1), (2), (3), (4) is a characterization for the left pure semisim-
plicity of a ring R.

    Now finally, we come to the connection between pure semisimplicity and rings
of FRT. This is given by the following theorem of Fuller and Reiten [FR] (ca. 1975),
which completed the earlier work of Auslander, Ringel and Tachikawa:

(7.3) Theorem. A ring R is of FRT iff it is both left and right pure semisimple;
that is, iff every left and every right R-module is a direct sum of f.g. submodules.

     The major question that remains in this area of study is whether left pure
semisimplicity is equivalent to right pure semisimplicity. An affirmative answer
to this question is known as the “Pure Semisimplicity Conjecture” (PSC) in ring
theory. If this Conjecture holds up, then the sufficiency part of the theorem above
would say that left pure semisimple rings are of FRT. As a positive evidence for
this, we mention the “sparsity” result of Prest [Pr], Zimmermann-Huisgen and
Zimmermann [ZZ2 ], which states that, over a left pure semisimple ring R, there
exist only finitely many (isomorphism types of) indecomposable left R-modules of
any given composition length. This means R comes indeed “reasonably close” to
being of finite representation type. Also, it is worth noting that, according to results
of Simson [Si3 ] and Herzog [Her], the general form of PSC would follow as soon as
one could prove that a left pure semisimple ring is necessarily right artinian. For
more perspectives and recent results on PSC, see [Si4 ] and the literature referenced
therein.

    For connections with the work of Bass, we note that, with the help of left
functor rings, PSC can actually be formulated entirely in terms of the notion of
perfect rings. We need the following additional fact, which can be gleaned from the
work of Auslander [Au1 ] and Fuller [Ful] (see also Wisbauer’s book [Wis: (54.3)]).

(7.4) Proposition. A ring R is left and right pure semisimple iff its left functor
ring E (defined in the paragraph preceding (7.2)) is both left and right perfect.

    Granted this and (7.2), the issue of whether a left pure semisimple ring R needs
to be right pure semisimple boils down to testing whether the perfectness of E on
the left would imply its perfectness on the right. In an earlier footnote (Footnote
(20)), we have mentioned Bass’s observation that, in general, a left perfect ring need
     24 A short exact sequence of left R-modules is said to be pure if it remains exact upon

tensoring by any right R-module.
30                                    T. Y. LAM


not be right perfect. The above considerations show, however, that PSC reduces to
a “left perfect implies right perfect” statement, for the special class of left functor
rings.

     As we have mentioned at the end of §6, Bass’s ideas of using projective covers
and the condition “flat ⇒ projective” for module categories have been successfully
carried over to categories of functors. Such a generalization has proved to be quite
fruitful for the representation theory of artinian rings; see, inter alia, the work of
Auslander [Au1 ] and Simson [Si1 ]. Bass’s left and right T -nilpotency conditions
for ideals perhaps also inspired Auslander’s definition in [Au1 ] of noetherian and
conoetherian conditions for families of homomorphisms between modules. In fact,
for a left artinian ring R, the left and right T -nilpotency conditions on the Jacobson
radical of the left functor ring E are precisely equivalent to the noetherian and co-
noetherian conditions for families of homomorphisms between f.g. indecomposable
left R-modules. From these and the preceding discussions, we see that Bass’s early
work in [B1 ] has certainly played a substantial and rather interesting role in the
later development of the representation theory of artinian rings.

                           §8. Stable Range of Rings
     The notion of stable range for rings is another great invention of Bass that has
proved to be of lasting importance in algebra and ring theory. This notion was
originally introduced by Bass (in [B9 : p. 14]) for the study of stabilization questions
in algebraic K-theory, or at least for working with the functor K1 . The definition
of stable range goes as follows.

(8.1) Definition. We say that a positive integer n is in the stable range of a ring R
(or, more informally, that R “has stable range n ”) if, whenever a1 R+· · ·+am+1 R =
R for m ≥ n (where all ai ∈ R), there exist elements x1 , . . . , xm ∈ R such that
                  (a1 + am+1 x1 )R + · · · + (am + am+1 xm )R = R.
     It is straightforward to see that, to verify the condition for stable range n given
above, it is sufficient to do so in the critical case m = n. (It follows that if n is in
the stable range for R, then so is any larger integer.) Also, although it appears that
we should have referred to the above condition as R having “right” stable range
n (since the definition was based on the use of right ideals), it has been shown
later by Vaserstein [V1 : Th. 2] (and also by Warfield [Wa2 : Th. (1.6)]) that “right
stable range n” and “left stable range n” are actually equivalent conditions. For
this reason, we shall suppress any reference to side in referring to the stable range
conditions defined in (8.1).

     For readers familiar with Bass’s big book [B10 ], we should point out that there
is a small discrepancy between the stable range notation used here and that used
in [B10 ]. What we called “stable range n” above corresponds to what Bass called
SRn+1 in his book. We believe the usage in (8.1) is now the standard one.

    Bass’s study of the stable range of rings was again motivated by the basic ideas
of stability in the homotopy theory of vector bundles. His main results may be
summarized in the fundamental theorem (8.2) below, which is to be thought of as
the “K1 -analogue” of Corollary (2.6). Here, GLn (R) denotes the n×n general linear
             BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                       31


group over the ring R, and En (R) denotes its subgroup generated by the n × n
elementary matrices In + aeij (i 6= j, a ∈ R); K1 (R) denotes the Whitehead group
GL(R)/E(R) in algebraic K-theory, where GL(R) and E(R) are, respectively, the
direct limits of the groups GLr (R) ’s and Er (R), taken over all positive integers r.

(8.2) Theorem. (See [B9 : (4.2), (11.1)] and [B10 : pp. 239-240].)
(1) If a ring R has stable range n, then GLn (R) → K1 (R) is a surjective ho-
momorphism. Moreover, for any r ≥ n + 1, Er (R) is normal in GLr (R), and
GLr (R)/Er (R) → K1 (R) is an isomorphism.
(2) Let A be a commutative ring whose maximal ideal spectrum max(A) is a noe-
therian space of dimension d. Then, any module-finite A-algebra R has stable
range d + 1. In particular, the conclusions of (1) apply to such an algebra R for
n = d + 1.

    The second part of this theorem has been generalized to noncommutative noe-
therian rings R by Stafford; see [St]. In the case of commutative rings R, there
has also been work done toward the removal of the noetherian hypothesis on the
maximal ideal spectrum. For instance, Heitmann [Hei] has shown that, if R is a
commutative ring of Krull dimension d, then R has stable range d + 2 (and d + 1
if R is a domain).

     As one would perhaps expect, the case of stable range 1 has a special signifi-
cance, not shared by the general case of stable range n. It is true, for instance, that
having stable range 1 is a Morita invariant property of a ring, while, for n > 1,
having stable range n is not a Morita invariant property [V1 , V2 , Wa2 ]. The study
of stable range has led to many new and unexpected results in the arithmetic of
rings and the structure theory of modules. In the rest of this section (and the next),
we shall give a survey of some of the interesting mathematics which resulted from
this study, and which certainly would not have been possible without the pioneering
work of Bass. We begin with the following useful observation that apparently first
appeared in an unpublished note of Kaplansky [K3 ].

(8.3) Proposition. If a ring R has stable range 1, then R is Dedekind-finite; that
is, uv = 1 ∈ R implies that vu = 1 ∈ R.

Proof (following [K3 ]). Say uv = 1 ∈ R. Since vR + (1 − vu)R = R, there exists
t ∈ R such that w := v + (1 − vu)t has a right inverse. Left-multiplying this
equation by u, we get uw = 1. Therefore, w has also a left inverse. It follows that
w, u ∈ U(R) (the group of units of R), and hence vu = 1.         QED

    For an alternative approach to this Proposition, see the beginning of §8 below.
An immediate consequence of the Proposition is the following somewhat sharper
formulation for the condition of stable range 1.

(8.4) Corollary. A ring R has stable range 1 iff, whenever aR + bR = R, there
exists x ∈ R such that a + bx ∈ U(R) (the group of units of R).

    We recorded this corollary explicitly since the characterization for stable range
1 contained herein is often used as its definition in papers in the literature dealing
with the stable range of rings.
32                                     T. Y. LAM


     In [B9 : (6.5)], Bass proved the following basic result:

(8.5) Theorem. Any semilocal ring R has stable range 1.

    For a modern reader, this is a very natural result. One can first check (without
too much difficulty) that a semisimple ring has stable range 1, and then deduce
(8.5) from the observation that, in general, R has n in its stable range if R/rad(R)
does. (For more details, see [La3 : pp. 313-314].) Conceptually, one can think of
(8.5) as the “0-dimensional case” of part (2) of Theorem 8.2; in fact, in the case
of commutative rings, R semilocal means that max(R) is finite, and therefore a
0-dimensional space.

     Bass’s study of stable range was quickly picked up by Estes and Ohm, who
obtained various results in 1967 on stable range in the commutative case. The case
of local rings shows already that a (commutative) ring R may have arbitrary Krull
dimension, but still have 1 in its stable range. In [EO], Estes and Ohm constructed
commutative Bézout domains of arbitrary dimension with 1 in their stable range.
For other interesting examples of rings of stable range 1 and 2, see, for instance,
the work of Heinzer [He], Jensen [Je], Menal-Moncasi [MM], and Warfield [Wa2 ].

    Warfield’s paper [Wa2 ] is a very important contribution to the study of the
stable range of noncommutative rings. In this paper, he studied the endomorphism
ring E := EndR (M ) of a right module M over an arbitrary ring R, and sought
characterizations for such a ring E to have stable range n (for a given integer n)
. Since Warfield’s results lead to very interesting noncommutative cancellation
theorems harkening back to Bass’s results in §2, we shall give a quick exposition on
the gist of [Wa2 ] below. The first result of Warfield characterizes the stable range
of E := EndR (M ) in terms of a certain “substitution property” of M , as follows.

(8.6) Theorem. [Wa2 : (1.6)] Let M be any right R-module with endomorphism
ring E := EndR (M ) (operating on the left on M ). Then E has (right) stable range
n iff M has the following “ n-Substitution Property”:
(S)n For any split epimorphism π from T = M n ⊕ X to M , there exists a splitting
ϕ such that T = ϕ(M ) ⊕ Y ⊕ X, where Y ⊆ M n .

     The proof of (8.6) consists of a fairly straightforward manipulation of the defi-
nition of stable range n.

(8.7) Remarks. (1) Note that if (S)n holds, then in the notation there we have
(8.8)                     = Y ⊕ X, and M n ∼
                   ker(π) ∼                     = Y ⊕ M.
The first follows since both sides of the equation are direct complements of ϕ(M ) in
T ; the second follows similarly since both M n and Y ⊕ϕ(M ) are direct complements
of X in T (and ϕ(M ) ∼   = M ).
(2) Since the n-Substitution Property (S)n on M depends only on E by (8.6),
it follows that if N is any module over any other ring with endomorphism ring
isomorphic to E, then M satisfies (S)n iff N does.

     To see the effect of (8.6) (and (8.7)) on module cancellations, we formulate the
following slight improvement on Warfield’s result in [Wa2 : (1.3)].
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                 33


(8.9) Theorem. Let M be any right R-module with endomorphism ring E :=
EndR (M ) having stable range n ≥ 1. For any right R-modules P and Q, the
following are equivalent:
(1) For some module X, we have P = M n−1 ⊕ X and M ⊕ P =∼ M ⊕Q;
(2) For some modules X and Y , we have
(8.10)          P ∼
                  = M n−1 ⊕ X, Q ∼
                                 = Y ⊕ X, and M ⊕ Y ∼ = M n.

Proof. If (2) holds, then from (8.10):
         M ⊕P ∼  = M ⊕ M n−1 ⊕ X ∼  = Mn ⊕ X ∼
                                             =M ⊕Y ⊕X ∼
                                                      = M ⊕ Q.
Conversely, if (1) holds, let T := M ⊕ P = M ⊕ M n−1 ⊕ X. Since T ∼  = M ⊕ Q has
a split epimorphism π into M with ker(π) ∼  = Q, the property (S)n for M implies
the existence of a splitting ϕ such that T = ϕ(M ) ⊕ Y ⊕ X, where Y ⊆ M n . By
(8.8), we have M ⊕ Y ∼  = M n , and Q ∼
                                      = ker(π) ∼
                                               = Y ⊕ X, as required in (2). (Note
that the condition Y ⊆ M n from (S)n is never used in all of the arguments above.)
QED

    Note that, if we could have the implication
(8.11)                    M ⊕Y ∼  = M n =⇒ Y ∼  = M n−1 ,
then in (2) above, we would have been able to conclude that P ∼= Q. While (8.11)
does hold sometimes,25 it cannot be counted on in the most general situation. To
get a good cancellation theorem out of (8.9), we can, instead, impose a slightly
stronger assumption on the module P , as in the following result.

(8.12) Warfield’s Cancellation Theorem. [Wa2 : (1.2)] Let M be any right R-
module with endomorphism ring E := EndR (M ) having stable range n ≥ 1. If P
contains a direct summand M n , then for any R-module Q,
                         M ⊕P ∼  = M ⊕ Q =⇒ P ∼ = Q.

Proof. Write P = M n ⊕W = M n−1 ⊕X, where X := M ⊕W . If M ⊕P ∼
                                                              = M ⊕Q,
we’ll have the ismorphisms in (8.10) for some Y , and hence
                   Q∼=Y ⊕X ∼   =Y ⊕M ⊕W ∼     = M n ⊕ W = P,
as desired.          QED

    In the special case when E = EndR (M ) has stable range 1, the theorem above
holds even without any assumption on P (or on Q); we shall come back to this
point in §9.

    In comparison with Bass’s Cancellation Theorem (2.4)(2), the advantage of
Warfield’s (8.12) lies in the fact that there is neither a dimension assumption nor a
noetherian assumption in its statement. Thus, (8.12) may be regarded as a “truly
noncommutative” cancellation result. To see that (8.12) essentially retrieves the
cancellability of a f.g. projective module M in the setting of (2.4)(2), we may first
replace M there by Rm for some m, and then reduce to the case when M = R.
     25 By a principle of A. Dress [La : (18.59)], (8.11) holds iff E ⊕W ∼ E n (as right E-modules)
                                      5                                  =
implies W ∼ = E n−1 . Thus, (8.11) will hold if, say, stably free right modules over E are free and
E has invariant basis number.
34                                    T. Y. LAM


In this case, E = EndR (M ) ∼  = R. If R is module-finite over a commutative ring
whose maximum spectrum is a noetherian space of dimension d, then by (8.2)(2),
R has stable range d + 1. So, as long as P has a free direct summand of rank d + 1,
(8.12) enables us to cancel off M = R in (2.5).

     In order to apply (8.12), one needs to know about the stable range of the
endomorphism rings of modules. In this direction, Warfield has further generalized
Bass’s result (2.4)(2) by taking the module-finite A-algebra R there and considering
finitely presented right modules M over R. In [Wa2 : (3.4)], Warfield showed that,
if max(A) is noetherian of dimension d, then EndR (M ) has d + 1 in its stable
range. Thus, one can apply (8.12) with n = d + 1. Since MR need no longer
be a projective module, this leads to cancellation results well beyond the reach of
(2.4)(2). Warfield’s proof involved some new techniques, since Bass’s methods did
not apply to endomorphism rings.

                        §9. Rings of Stable Range One
    To conclude our exposition, we shall consider in this section the case of rings of
stable range 1. The crucial result here is that of Bass (Theorem 8.5), which states
that semilocal rings have stable range 1. Again, as it turned out, this single result
served as the fountain-head of many beautiful ideas to come; the survey in this
section will show how much this result has stimulated subsequent research on the
stable range of rings.

    For the balance of this section, we shall only consider the stable range 1 case.
First let us make the following useful observation.

(9.1) Remark. Any module MR satisfying the 1-Substitution Property (S)1 in
(8.6) is necessarily Dedekind-finite; that is, M is not isomorphic to a proper direct
summand of itself.

    To see this, suppose there is an isomorphism π : M ⊕ W → M . Applying
(S)1 to π, we have a splitting ϕ for π (necessarily π −1 !) such that M ⊕ W =
ϕ(M ) ⊕ Y ⊕ W for some Y . But ϕ(M ) = T , so W (as well as Y ) must be zero,
proving (9.1).

     Note that (9.1) gives us another view of the fact (8.3) that a ring R of stable
range 1 is Dedekind-finite. In fact, if R has (right) stable range 1, then, viewing R
as End(RR ), (8.6) shows that RR satisfies (S)1 , and hence (9.1) shows that RR
is Dedekind-finite. But this is the same as saying that its endomorphism ring R is
Dedekind-finite (as a ring). This is a more conceptual, if somewhat longer, proof
of (8.3).

    Equipped now with the information in (9.1), let us take another look at the
condition (S)1 on M :

(S)1 For any split epimorphism π from T = M ⊕ X to M , there exists a splitting
ϕ such that T = ϕ(M ) ⊕ Y ⊕ X, where Y ⊆ M .

Here, we have M ∼= Y ⊕ M (as observed in (8.8)), so if (S)1 holds for M , (9.1)
implies that Y = 0, and hence the conclusion of (S)1 simplifies to T = ϕ(M ) ⊕
            BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                      35


X. Thus, (S)1 simply says that, if X and ker(π) both have direct complements
isomorphic to M in a module T , then they have a common direct complement in
T . We can therefore restate (8.6) in the case n = 1 as follows.

(9.2) Theorem. The endomorphism ring E := EndR (M ) of an R-module MR
has stable range 1 iff M has the following “Substitution Property”: Whenever
a right R-module T has direct decompositions T = Mi ⊕ Pi for i = 1, 2 where
M1 ∼= M2 ∼  = M , there exists a submodule C ⊆ T such that T = C ⊕ Pi for
i = 1, 2.

    Note that, in the above notation, if the submodule C exists, we have, in par-
ticular, P1 ∼
            = T /C ∼
                   = P2 . Therefore, we have the following consequences of (9.2).

(9.3) Corollary. (1) If an R-module MR has an endomorphism ring with 1 in its
stable range, then M is “cancellable”; that is, for any right R-modules P, Q,
                          M ⊕P ∼
                               = M ⊕ Q =⇒ P ∼
                                            = Q.
(2) If a ring R has stable range 1, then RR is cancellable, and hence so is any
f.g. projective right (respectively, left) R-module.

     The result (9.3) was a cancellation theorem obtained earlier (ca. 1973) by
E. G. Evans in [Ev]. We are reporting the results in the reverse chronological
order here only because Warfield’s result (9.2) is more general than Evans’s, so it
is logically more convenient to state (9.2) first and deduce (9.3) as its corollary.

    To put things in the right historical perspective, we should also point out that
what we called the “Substitution Property” in (9.2) had been considered as early as
1971 by L. Fuchs. In [Fu], apparently unaware of Bass’s work on stable range, Fuchs
obtained a different characterization of the Substitution Property, and proved the
result (9.2) in the case MR = R (and some other cases), falling just short of proving
(9.2) for any R-module MR . Fuchs also considered the case of von Neumann regular
rings R and sought conditions for R to have the Substitution Property (that is, to
have stable range 1). He obtained the following result ([Fu: Cor. 1 and Th. 4]),
which was also proved independently by Kaplansky [K3 : Th. 3].

(9.4) Theorem. A von Neumann regular ring R has stable range 1 iff, for x, y ∈
R, xR ∼= yR =⇒ R/xR ∼
                    = R/yR.

    Since any principal right ideal xR in a von Neumann regular ring R is a
direct summand of the right module RR (and R/xR is isomorphic to any direct
complement of xR), the latter condition in Theorem 9.4 amounts to an “Internal
Cancellation Property” of the module RR ; that is, isomorphic direct summands in
RR have isomorphic direct complements. Now by subsequent results of Ehrlich and
Handelman on regular rings R ([Eh], [Ha1 ]; see also [La4 : p. 242]), the module RR
has this property iff the ring R is unit-regular, in the sense that, for any a ∈ R,
there exists a unit u ∈ R such that a = aua. Therefore, (9.4) amounts to the
fact that a von Neumann regular ring R has stable range 1 iff R is unit-regular .
This statement seemed to have appeared explicitly for the first time in Henriksen’s
paper [Hen: Prop. 8].
36                                       T. Y. LAM


    While the above results on unit-regular rings are concerned mainly with the
cancellation of f.g. projective modules, we should mention at least one case where
(9.3)(1) applies more generally to all f.g. modules. This is a result due to Menal
[Me], which deals with a certain subclass of unit-regular rings.

(9.5) Theorem. Let R be a von Neumann regular ring all of whose primitive factor
rings are artinian. Then for any f.g. projective right R-module M , EndR (M ) has
stable range 1. In particular, for any R-modules P and Q, M ⊕ P ∼= M ⊕ Q implies
P ∼= Q.

    Now let us come back to Bass’s theorem (8.5). Combining this theorem with
Evans’s Cancellation Theorem (9.3), we see that any module with a semilocal endo-
morphism ring is cancellable. Another recent result of Facchini, Herbera, Levy and
Vámos [FH: (2.1)] showed that, if P , Q are modules with semilocal endomorphism
rings, then they have the “n-cancellation property” (for any integer n ≥ 1); that is,
                               Pn ∼= Qn =⇒ P ∼ = Q.
(For a detailed survey on n-cancellation, see [La6 ].) These remarkable results give
us strong motivation for finding classes of modules which have semilocal endomor-
phism rings. Now the problem of describing the endomorphism rings of specific
kinds of modules has had a time-honored history, starting with the very famous
Schur’s Lemma:

(9.6) If M is a simple R-module, EndR (M ) is a division (and hence semilocal)
ring.
(9.7) Also well-known is the following classical generalization of Schur’s Lemma:
if MR is a module of finite length, then EndR (M ) is a semiprimary (and hence
semilocal) ring; see, for instance, [La4 : Ex. (21.24)].
(9.8) Any strongly indecomposable module has, by definition, a local (and hence
semilocal) endomorphism ring. Examples include, for instance, all indecomposable
modules of finite length, and all injective (in fact all quasi-injective or pure-injective)
indecomposable modules; see, e.g. [La5 : (3.52), Exer. (6.32)] and [F2 : (2.27)].
(9.9) Camps and Dicks [CD] showed in 1993 that any artinian module has a semilo-
cal endomorphism ring.
(9.10) In 1995, Herbera and Shamsuddin [HS] generalized the Camps-Dicks re-
sult above by showing that, if a module M has finite uniform dimension and
co-uniform dimension,26 then it has a semilocal endomorphism ring. This class in-
cludes all linearly compact modules27 , and therefore all artinian modules. Thus, the
Herbera-Shamsuddin result implies that linearly compact modules have semilocal
endomorphism rings; this affirms an earlier conjecture of Faith. In the commutative
case, a stronger conclusion is possible. In this case, any linearly compact module
     26 A module M is said to have finite uniform dimension if there is a bound on the numbers

n for which M contains a direct sum of n nonzero modules; dually, M is said to have finite
co-uniform dimension if there is a bound on the numbers n for which M has a quotient that is a
direct sum of n nonzero modules.
     27 An R-module M is said to be linearly compact if, for any submodules N ⊆ M and any
                                                                              i
elements mi ∈ M , any system of congruences {x ≡ mi (mod Ni )} that is finitely solvable is
solvable.
            BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                     37


MR is algebraically compact (i.e. purely injective) according to Jensen and Lenz-
ing [JL: p. 289]. Therefore, combining the Herbera-Shamsuddin result above with
[JL: (7.5)], we see that M has a semiperfect endomorphism ring. This provides a
nice connection back to the material of §5.
(9.11) A nonzero module is said to be uniserial if its submodules form a chain under
inclusion. Such a module has clearly uniform dimension and co-uniform dimension
both equal to 1. Thus, if M := U1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Un where the Ui ’s are uniserial, then
the “serial module” M has uniform and co-uniform dimension n, and hence it has
a semilocal endomorphism ring by (9.10). For more information on the structure
of End(Ui ), End(M ), and its applications to a (weak) Krull-Schmidt Theorem for
serial modules, see Facchini’s paper [F1 ] and his recent book [F2 ].

     In view of the remarks made before (9.6), any modules of the type listed in
(9.6)–(9.11) above have both the cancellation property and the n-cancellation prop-
erty.

    New results on stable range 1 are still being discovered today. Let us just
mention a couple of more recent works. In [Ca], Canfell studied the stable range
1 condition from the viewpoint of completing diagrams of modules using automor-
phisms, and made connections to the notions of epi-projective and mono-injective
modules. In [Ar], inspired by earlier results of Menal and Goodearl-Menal [GM],
Ara proved the remarkable result that

(9.12) Theorem. Any strongly π-regular ring (see §6) has stable range 1.

    In the commutative case, this amounts to the fact that any ring of Krull di-
mension 0 has stable range 1, which is close in spirit to part (2) of Bass’s Theorem
(8.2). In the general case, Ara’s result is rather deep, and depends heavily on the
use of noncommutative techniques. Combined with the earlier result of Armen-
dariz, Fisher and Snider [AFS], (9.12) implies that any module with the “Fitting
decomposition property” is cancellable: see (5.4) in [La6 ].

    In closing, we should also mention some interesting variations of the stable
range one condition, due to Goodearl and Menal. In [GM], Goodearl and Menal
considered the following two conditions for a ring E:

(A) ∀ a, b ∈ E, aE + bE = E =⇒ ∃ u ∈ U(E) such that a + bu ∈ U(E); and
(B) ∀ a, b ∈ E, ∃ u ∈ U(E) such that a − u and b − u−1 ∈ U(E).

They showed that (B) ⇒ (A), and obviously (A) ⇒ stable range 1. They called
condition (A) (right) “unit 1-stable range”; the unitary analogue of it has been
exploited for C ∗ -algebras. Another variation, also due to Goodearl, is a weakening
of stable range 1 condition. Extending Bass’s definition, Goodearl defined a ring
E to have the power-substitution property if, whenever aE + bE = E, there exists
a positive integer n and a matrix X ∈ Mn (E) such that a In + b X is a unit in
Mn (E). (This property is also known to be left-right symmetric.) Clearly, if E
has stable range 1, then it has the power-substitution property. The converse of
this is, however, not true. For instance, it can be shown that the ring Z has the
power-substitution property, but it certainly does not have stable range 1. The
38                                       T. Y. LAM


raison d’être for the power-substitution property lies in the following important
result of Goodearl on “power-cancellation” [Go2 : Cor. 4]:

(9.13) Theorem. Let M, P, Q be right modules over an arbitrary ring R such
that M ⊕ P ∼= M ⊕ Q. If E := EndR (M ) has the power-substitution property,
then P n ∼
         = Qn for some n ≥ 1.

    This result of Goodearl is, of course, an extension of (9.3)(1). In fact, in the
case when the endomorphism ring E has stable range 1, the proof of Goodearl’s
result boils down to that of Evans, and gives the conclusion P ∼    = Q. The power
of (9.13) stems from the fact that many different types of rings happen to have
the power-substitution property; a good list of such rings is given in my survey
[La6 : p. 34]. In §5 of this survey, there is also a summary of the many interesting
results, due to Goodearl, Guralnick, and Levy-Wiegand, on the power-cancellation
exponent n occurring in the statement of (9.13).

Acknowledgment. The author heartily thanks Larry Levy for a critical reading of
a penultimate version of this paper. His many thoughtful comments and suggestions
have led to various improvements in my exposition.

                                       References

[AF1 ] F. W. Anderson and K. R. Fuller: Modules with decompositions that complement direct
       summands, J. Algebra 22(1972), 241-253.
[AF2 ] F. W. Anderson and K. R. Fuller: Rings and Categories of Modules, Second Edition,
       Graduate Texts in Math., Vol. 13, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1992.
[ASZ] K. Ajitabh, S. P. Smith and J. J. Zhang: Auslander-Gorenstein rings, preprint, 1998.
[Ar]   P. Ara: Strongly π-regular rings have stable range 1, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 124(1996),
       3293-3298.
[AFS] E. P. Armendariz, J. W. Fisher and R. L. Snider: On injective and surjective endomor-
       phisms of finitely generated modules, Comm. Algebra 6(1978), 659-672.
[Au1 ] M. Auslander: Representation theory of artin algebras II , Comm. Algebra 1(1974), 269-
       310.
[Au2 ] M. Auslander: Large modules over artin algebras, in ”Algebra, Topology and Categories”,
       Academic Press, 1976, pp. 1-17.
[Az1 ] G. Azumaya: Completely faithful modules and self-injective rings, Nagoya Math. J.
       27(1966), 697-708.
[Az2 ] G. Azumaya: Characterization of semiperfect and perfect modules, Math. Zeit. 140(1974),
       95-103.
[Az3 ] G. Azumaya: Locally split submodules and modules with perfect endomorphism rings,
       in “Noncommutative Ring Theory” (Athens, Ohio), Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
       Vol. 1448, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1990.
[Az4 ] G. Azumaya: F -semiperfect modules, J. Algebra 136(1991), 73-85.
[Az5 ] G. Azumaya: A characterization of semiperfect rings and modules, in Ring Theory,
       Proc. Ohio State-Denison Conf. (1992) (S.K. Jain and S. T. Rizvi, eds.), World Scien-
       tific Publishers, River Edge, N.J., 1993.
[B1 ]  H. Bass: Finitistic dimension and a homological generalization of semiprimary rings,
       Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 95(1960), 466-488.
[B2 ]  H. Bass: Projective modules over algebras, Annals of Math. 73(1961), 532-542.
[B3 ]  H. Bass: Injective dimension in Noetherian rings, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 102(1962),
       18-29.
[B4 ]  H. Bass: Torsion free and projective modules, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 102(1962), 319-
       327.
[B5 ]  H. Bass: Big projective modules are free, Illinois J. Math. 7(1963), 24-31.
[B6 ]  H. Bass: On the ubiquity of Gorenstein rings, Math. Zeit. 82(1963), 8-28.
              BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                 39


[B7 ]  H. Bass: Projective modules over free groups are free, J. Algebra 1(1964), 367-373.
[B8 ]  H. Bass: The stable structure of quite general linear groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.
       70(1964), 429-433.
[B9 ]  H. Bass: K-theory and stable algebra, Publ. IHES 22(1964), 5-60.
[B10 ] H. Bass: Algebraic K-Theory, Mathematics Lecture Note Series, W. A. Benjamin,
       Inc./Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA., 1968.
[B11 ] H. Bass: Libération des modules projectifs sur certains anneaux des polynômes, Sém. Bour-
       baki, 26e année (1973/74), Exp. No. 448, pp. 228-254, Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 431,
       Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York.
[BMS] H. Bass, J. Milnor and J.-P. Serre: Solution of the congruence subgroup problem for
       SLn (n ≥ 3) and Sp2n (n ≥ 2), Publ. IHES 33(1967), 59-137.
[BS] H. Bass and S. Schanuel: The homotopy theory of projective modules, Bull. Amer. Math.
       Soc. 68(1962), 425-428.
[Bj1 ] J.-E. Björk: Rings satisfying a minimum condition on principal ideals, J. reine angew.
       Math. 236(1969), 112-119.
[Bj2 ] J.-E. Björk: On rings satisfying certain chain conditions, J. reine angew. Math. 237(1970),
       63-73.
[CD] R. Camps and W. Dicks: On semilocal rings, Israel J. Math. 81(1993), 203-211.
[Ca]   M. J. Canfell: Completions of diagrams by automorphisms and Bass’ first stable range
       condition, J. Algebra 176(1995). 480-503.
[C]    I. S. Cohen: Commutative rings with restricted minimum condition, Duke Math. J.
       17(1950), 27-42.
[Co]   J. H. Cozzens: Homological properties of the ring of differential polynomials, Bull. Amer.
       Math. Soc. 76(1970), 75-79.
[CF] J. H. Cozzens and C. Faith: Simple Noetherian Rings, Cambridge Tracts in Math., Vol. 69,
       Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1975.
[CJ]   P. Crawley anf B. Jónsson: Refinements for infinite direct decompositions of algebraic
       systems, Pacific J. Math. 14(1964), 797-855.
[CR] C. W. Curtis and I. Reiner: Methods of Representation Theory, Vol. 1, J. Wiley and Sons,
       Inc., New York, 1981.
[DKR] Yu. A. Drozd, V. V. Kirichenko and A. V. Roĭter: On hereditary and Bass orders,
       Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Ser. Mat. 31(1967), 1415-1436. (English Transl.: Math. USSR
       Izv. 1(1967), 1357-1376.)
[Eh]   G. Ehrlich: Units and 1-sided units in regular rings, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 216(1976),
       81-90.
[Ei]   S. Eilenberg: Homological dimension and syzygies, Annals of Math. 64(1956), 328-336.
[EG] D. Eisenbud and P. A. Griffith: The structure of serial rings, Pacific J. Math. 36(1971),
       109-121.
[EO] D. Estes and J. Ohm: Stable range in commutative rings, J. Algebra 7(1967), 343-362.
[Ev]   E. G. Evans, Jr.: Krull-Schmidt and cancellation over local rings, Pacific J. Math.
       46(1973), 115-121.
[F1 ]  A. Facchini: Krull-Schmidt fails for serial modules, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 348(1996),
       4561-4575.
[F2 ]  A. Facchini: Module Theory: Endomorphism Rings and Direct Sum Decompositions in
       Some Classes of Modules, Progress in Math., Vol. 167, Birkäuser Boston, 1998.
[FH] A. Facchini, D. Herbera, L. Levy and P. Vámos: Krull-Schmidt fails for artinian modules,
       Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 123(1995), 3587-3592.
[Fa1 ] C. Faith: Rings with minimum condition on principal ideals, Arch. Math. 10(1959), 327-
       330; Part II, ibid. 12(1961), 179-181.
[Fa2 ] C. Faith: Rings with ascending condition on annihilators, Nagoya Math. Journal 27(1966),
       179-191.
[Fa3 ] C. Faith: Rings and Things and a Fine Array of Twentieth Century Associative Algebra,
       Math. Surveys and Monographs, Vol. 65, 1999, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I.
[FU] C. Faith and Y. Utumi: Quasi-injective modules and their endomorphism rings, Arch.
       Math. 15(1964), 166-174.
[Fu]   L. Fuchs: On a substitution property of modules, Monatsh. Math. 75(1971), 198-204.
[Ful] K. R. Fuller: On rings whose left modules are direct sums of finitely generated modules,
       Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 54(1976), 39-44.
40                                           T. Y. LAM


[FR]     K. R. Fuller and I. Reiten: Note on rings of finite representation type and decompositions
         of modules, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 50(1975), 92-94.
[Go1 ]   K. R. Goodearl: von Neumann Regular Rings, Second Edition, Krieger Publ. Co., Malabar,
         Florida, 1991.
[Go2 ]   K. R. Goodearl: Power-cancellation of modules, Ring Theory II, Proc. Second Conf. Univ.
         Oklahoma (B. R. McDonald and R. A. Morris, eds.), pp. 131-147, Lecture Notes in Pure
         and Applied Math. 26, M. Dekker, New York, 1977.
[GM]     K. R. Goodearl and P. Menal: Stable range one for rings with many units, J. Pure Appl. Al-
         gebra 54(1988), 261-287.
[Gr]     C. Greither: On the two generator problem for the ideals of a one-dimensional ring, J. Pure
         Appl. Algebra 24(1982), 265-276.
[GJ]     L. Gruson and C. U. Jensen: Deux applications de la notion de L-dimension, C. R. Acad.
         Sci. Paris, Sér. A 282(1976), 23-24.
[HL]     J. Haefner and L. Levy: Commutative orders whose lattices are direct sums of ideals,
         J. Pure Appl. Algebra 50(1988), 1-20.
[Ha1 ]   D. Handelman: Perspectivity and cancellation in regular rings, J. Algebra 48(1977), 1-16.
[Ha2 ]   D. Handelman: Propinquity of one-dimensional Gorenstein rings, J. Pure Appl. Algebra
         24(1982), 145-150.
[H]      M. Harada: Perfect categories I, II, III, Osaka J. Math. 10(1973), 329-341, 343-355, 357-
         367.
[HI]     M. Harada and T. Ishii: On perfect rings and the exchange property, Osaka J. Math.
         121(1975), 483-491.
[He]     W. J. Heinzer: J-Noetherian integral domains with 1 in the stable range, Proc. A.M.S.
         19(1968), 1369-1372.
[Hei]    R. Heitmann: Generating ideals in Prüfer domains, Pacific J. Math. 62(1976), 117-126.
[Hen]    M. Henriksen: On a class of regular rings that are elementary divisor rings, Arch. Math.
         24(1973), 133-141.
[HS]     D. Herbera and A. Shamsuddin: Modules with semilocal endomorphism rings, Proc. Amer.
         Math. Soc. 123(1995), 3593-3600.
[Her]    I. Herzog: A test for finite representation type, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 95(1994), 151-185.
[Hu]     C. Huneke: Hyman Bass and ubiquity: Gorenstein rings, this volume, pp.
[Ja]     J. P. Jans: Duality of Noetherian rings, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 12(1961), 829-835.
[Je]     C. U. Jensen: Some curiosities of rings of analytic functions, J. Pure Appl. Algebra
         38(1985), 277-283.
[JL]     C. U. Jensen and H. Lenzing: Model Theoretic Algebra: with particular emphasis on fields,
         rings, and modules, Gordon and Breach, N.Y., 1989.
[Jo]     D. Jonah: Rings with the minimum condition for principal right ideals have the maximum
         condition for principal left ideals, Math. Zeit. 113(1970), 106-112.
[K1 ]    I. Kaplansky: Topological representations of algebras II, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
         68(1950),62-75.
[K2 ]    I. Kaplansky: Projective modules, Ann. Math. 68(1958), 372-377.
[K3 ]    I. Kaplansky: Bass’s first stable range condition, mimeographed notes, 1971.
[Ka]     F. Kasch: Modules and Rings, Academic Press, London-New York, 1982.
[KM]     F. Kasch and E. Mares: Eine Kennzeichnung semi-perfekter Moduln, Nagoya Math. J.
         27(1966), 525-529,                                       L
[Ke]     D. Keskin: Characterization of right perfect rings by      -supplemented modules, Lecture
         at International Conference on Algebra and Its Applications, Athens, Ohio, March, 1999.
[Ko]     L. A. Koifman: Rings over which each module has a maximal submodule, Mat. Zametki
         7(1970), 359-367. (English Transl.: Math. Notes 7(1970), 215-219.)
[KS]     A. I. Kostrikin and I. R. Shafarevich: Algebra II, Encyclopedia of Math. Sciences, Springer-
         Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1991.
[La1 ]   T. Y. Lam: The category of noetherian modules, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 55(1966), 1038-
         1040.
[La2 ]   T. Y. Lam: Serre’s Conjecture, Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 635, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-
         Heidelberg-New York, 1978.
[La3 ]   T. Y. Lam: A First Course in Noncommutative Rings, Graduate Texts in Math., Vol. 131,
         Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1991.
               BASS’S WORK IN RING THEORY AND PROJECTIVE MODULES                                  41


[La4 ] T. Y. Lam: Exercises in Classical Ring Theory, Problem Books in Mathematics, Springer-
       Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1995.
[La5 ] T. Y. Lam: Lectures on Modules and Rings, Graduate Texts in Math., Vol. 189, Springer-
       Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1999.
[La6 ] T. Y. Lam: Modules with isomorphic multiples and rings with isomorphic matrix rings —
       a survey, Monographie No. 35, L’Enseig. Math., Geneva, Switzerland, 1999.
[L]    J. Lambek: Lectures on Rings and Modules, Blaisdell, Waltham, Mass., 1966.
[Len] H. W. Lenstra: Complete intersections and Gorenstein rings, Proc. Conf., Elliptic Curves
       and Modular Forms (Hong Kong, 1993, J. Coates and S. T. Yau, eds.), 99-109, Interna-
       tional Press, 1995.
[Le]   L. S. Levy: Modules over Dedekind-like rings, J. Algebra 93(1985), 1-116.
[LR] L. S. Levy and J. C. Robson: Hereditary noetherian prime rings III: infinitely generated
       projective modules, to appear in J. Algebra.
[LW] L. S. Levy and R. Wiegand: Dedekind-like behavior of rings with 2-generated ideals, J. Pure
       Appl. Algebra 37(1985), 41-58.
[M]    E. Mares: Semiperfect modules, Math. Zeit. 82(1963), 347-360.
[Ma] J. Martinet: Modules sur l’algèbre du groupe quaternionien, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup.
       4(1971), 399-408.
[Me] P. Menal: On π-regular rings whose primitive factor rings are artinian, J. Pure
       Appl. Algebra 20(1981), 71-81.
[MM] P. Menal and J. Moncasi: On regular rings with stable range 2, J. Pure Appl. Algebra
       24(1982), 25-40.
[Mu] M. P. Murthy: A survey of obstruction theory for projective modules of top rank, this
       volume, pp.
[Mue] B. J. Müller: On semiperfect rings, Ill. J. Math. 14(1974), 464-467.
[NR] L. A. Nazarova and A. V. Roĭter: Refinement of a theorem of Bass, Dokl. Akad. Nauk
       SSSR 176(1967), 266-268. (English Transl.: Soviet Math. 8(1967), 1089-1092.)
[Ni1 ] W. K. Nicholson: I-rings, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 207(1975), 361-373.
[Ni2 ] W. K. Nicholson: On semiperfect modules, Canad. Math. Bull. 18(1975), 77-80.
[Ni3 ] W. K. Nicholson: Semiregular modules and rings, Canad. J. Math. 28(1976), 1105-1120.
[Ni4 ] W. K. Nicholson: Lifting idempotents and exchange rings, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
       229(1977), 269-278.
[OS] U. Oberst and H.-J. Schneider: Die Struktur von projektiven Moduln, Invent. Math
       13(1971), 295-304.
[Os]   B. Osofsky: A generalization of quasi-Frobenius rings, J. Algebra 4(1966), 373-387.
[Pr]   M. Y. Prest: Duality and pure-semisimple rings, J. London Math. Soc. 38(1988), 403-409.
[Qu] D. Quillen: Projective modules over polynomial rings, Invent. Math. 36(1976), 167-171.
[Re]   R. Rentschler: Eine Bemerkung zu Ringen mit Minimalbedingung für Hauptideale,
       Arch. Math. 17(1966), 298-301.
[Ro]   A. V. Roĭter: An analog of Bass’ Theorem for representation modules of noncommu-
       tative orders, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 168(1966), 1261-1264. (English Transl.: Soviet
       Math. Dokl. 7(1966), 830-833.)
[Sa1 ] F. L. Sandomierski: On semiperfect and perfect rings, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 21(1969),
       205-207.
[Sa2 ] F. L. Sandomierski: Linearly compact modules and local Morita duality, in Ring Theory
       (Proc. Conf., Park City, Utah, R. Gordon, ed.), pp. 333-346, Academic Press, New York,
       1972.
[Sat] H. Sato: Gorenstein rings with semigroup bases, J. Algebra 88(1984), 460-488.
[S1 ]  J.-P. Serre: Faisceaux algébriques cohérents, Ann. Math. 61(1955), 191-278.
[S2 ]  J.-P. Serre: Modules projectifs et espaces fibrés à fibre vectorielle, Sém. Dubreil-Pisot,
       no. 23, Secretariat Math., Paris, 1957/58.
[S3 ]  J.-P. Serre: Sur les modules projectifs, Sém. Dubreil-Pisot, no. 2, Secretariat Math., Paris,
       1960/61.
[Se1 ] C. S. Seshadri: Triviality of vector bundles over the affine space K 2 , Proc. Nat. Acad.
       Sci. U.S.A. 44(1958), 456-458.
[Se2 ] C. S. Seshadri: Algebraic vector bundles over the product of an affine curve and the affine
       line, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 10(1959), 670-673.
42                                            T. Y. LAM


[Si1 ]     D. Simson: Functor categories in which every flat object is projective, Bull. Acad. Polon.
           Sci. 22(1974), 375-380.
[Si2 ]     D. Simson: Pure semisimple categories and rings of finite representation type, J. Algebra
           48(1977), 290-296. (Corrigendum: J. Algebra 67(1980), 254-256.)
[Si3 ]     D. Simson: Partial Coxeter functors and right pure semisimple rings, J. Algebra 71(1981),
           195-218.
[Si4 ]     D. Simson: An Artin problem for division ring extensions and the pure semisimplicity
           conjecture, Arch. Math. 66(1996), 114-122.
[Sm]       L. Small: Reviews in Ring Theory (as printed in Math. Reviews, 1940-79), Amer.
           Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1981.
[St]       J. T. Stafford: Stable structure of noncommutative Noetherian rings, J. Algebra 47(1977),
           244-267.
[Su]       A. Suslin: Projective modules over a polynomial ring are free, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR
           229(1976). (English Transl.: Soviet Math. Dokl. 17(1976), 160-164.)
[Sw1 ]     R. Swan: Vector bundles and projective modules, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 105(1962),
           264-277.
[Sw2 ]     R. Swan: Projective modules over group rings and maximal orders, Annals of Math.
           76(1962), 55-61.
[SE]       R. Swan and E. G. Evans, Jr.: K-Theory of Finite Groups and Orders, Lecture Notes in
           Math., Vol. 149, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1970.
[Sz]       F. Szász: Über Ringe mit Minimalbedingung für Hauptrechtsideale, I, Publ. Math. De-
           brecen 7(1960), 54-64; II, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar. 12(1961), 417-439; III, ibid.
           14(1963), 447-461.
[TW]       R. Taylor and A. Wiles: Ring-theoretic properties of certain Hecke algebras, Annals of
           Math. 141(1995), 553-572.
[V1 ]      L. N. Vaserstein: Stable rank of rings and dimensionality of topological spaces, Funct.
           Anal. Appl. 5(1971), 102-110.
[V2 ]      L. N. Vaserstein: Bass’ first stable range condition, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 34(1984), 319-
           330.
[Wa1 ]     R. Warfield: Exchange rings and decompositions of modules, Math. Annalen 199(1972),
           31-36.
[Wa2 ]     R. Warfield: Cancellation of modules and groups and stable range of endomorphism rings,
           Pac. J. Math 91(1980), 457-485.
[We]       C. Weibel: The development of algebraic K-theory before 1980, this volume, pp.
[Wi]       R. Wiegand: Cancellation over commutative rings of dimension one and two, J. Algebra
           88(1984), 438-459.
[W]        A. Wiles: Modular elliptic curves and Fermat’s Last Theorem, Annals of Math. 142(1995),
           443-551.
[Wis]      R. Wisbauer: Foundations of Module and Ring Theory, Gordon and Breach, Philadelphia,
           PA, 1991.
[Ya]       K. Yamagata: On projective modules with the exchange property, Sci. Rep. Tokyo Kyoiku
           Daigaku, Sect. A 12(1974), 39-48.
[Zi1 ]     B. Zimmermann-Huisgen: Rings whose right modules are direct sums of indecomposable
           modules, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 77(1979), 191-197.
[Zi2 ]     B. Zimmermann-Huisgen: On the abundance of ℵ1 -separable modules, in “Abelian Groups
           and Noncommutative Rings”, Contemp. Math. 130(1992), 167-180, AMS.
[ZZ1 ]     B. Zimmermann-Huisgen and W. Zimmermann: Classes of modules with the exchange
           property, J. Algebra 88(1984), 416-434.
[ZZ2 ]     B. Zimmermann-Huisgen and W. Zimmermann: On the sparsity of representations of rings
           of pure global dimension zero, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 320(1990), 695-711.

         Department of Mathematics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
         E-mail address: lam@math.berkeley.edu
