                                           Uniform negative immersions and the coherence
                                                       of one-relator groups
arXiv:2107.08911v2 [math.GR] 8 Feb 2024




                                                              Larsen Louder and Henry Wilton
                                                                         February 9, 2024

                                                                              Abstract
                                                   Previously, the authors proved that the presentation complex of a one-
                                               relator group G satisfies a geometric condition called negative immersions
                                               if every two-generator, one-relator subgroup of G is free. Here, we prove
                                               that one-relator groups with negative immersions are coherent, answering
                                               a question of Baumslag in this case. Other strong constraints on the
                                               finitely generated subgroups also follow such as, for example, the co-Hopf
                                               property. The main new theorem strengthens negative immersions to
                                               uniform negative immersions, using a rationality theorem proved with
                                               linear-programming techniques.


                                          1    Introduction
                                          Definition 1.1 (Coherence). A group G is said to be coherent if all its finitely
                                          generated subgroups are finitely presentable.
                                              A notorious question of Baumslag [Bau74, p. 76] asks whether every one-
                                          relator group G = F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ is coherent. It is a curious fact that the many
                                          known examples of one-relator groups with pathological propertes — for in-
                                          stance, Baumslag–Solitar groups, the Baumslag–Gersten group [Bau69], or the
                                          recent examples of Gardam–Woodhouse [GW19] — all have two generators.
                                          Our first theorem resolves Baumslag’s question, as long as such subgroups are
                                          excluded.

                                          Theorem A. Let G = F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ be a one-relator group. If every two-generator,
                                          one-relator subgroup of G is free, then G is coherent.
                                              The case where G has torsion was proved independently by the authors
                                          [LW20] and Wise [Wis20]. Sapir and Spakulova showed that a generic one-
                                          relator group with at least three generators is coherent [Sv11].
                                              The hypothesis of Theorem A — that every two-generator, one-relator sub-
                                          group is free — appears on its face to be difficult to check. However, the results
                                          of [LW22] imply that it is equivalent to other, more effective, conditions. The



                                                                                   1
following theorem, which follows from [LW22, Theorems 1.3 and 1.5], sum-
marises these equivalences. (The relevant definitions are explained below.) By
convention, the relator w is always assumed to be non-trivial.
Theorem 1.2 ([LW22]). Let G = F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ be a one-relator group, and let X be
the natural presentation complex. The following conditions are equivalent:

 (i) the primitivity rank π(w) > 2;
 (ii) X has negative immersions;
(iii) every two-generator subgroup of G is free;

(iv) every two-generator, one-relator subgroup of G is free.
   Since it is the briefest to state, if any of these hold we say that X or G has
negative immersions.
Remark 1.3. Puder’s primitivity rank π(w) is a positive integer (or infinite if w
is a basis element) [Pud14]. We will not need its definition here, but we make
the following remarks.
 (i) The primitivity rank π(w) can be computed algorithmically: see [LW22,
     Lemma 6.4] or [Pud14, Appendix A] for algorithms, and see [CHar] for
     extensive computations.
 (ii) Puder also showed that a generic word w in a free group of rank r has
      π(w) = r [Pud15, Corollary 8.3], so generic one-relator groups with more
      than two generators have negative immersions. (A more refined result was
      later proved by Kapovich [Kap22].)
(iii) Combining [Pud15, Corollary 8.3] with Theorems A and 1.2 recovers the
      result of Sapir–Spakulova that random one-relator groups with at least
      three generators are coherent. Instead of [Pud15, Corollary 8.3], one can
      also appeal to the work of Arzhantseva–Olshanskii, who proved that a
      random group with at least 3 generators is 2-free [AO96].
   Condition (ii) of Theorem 1.2 is a geometric condition on the 2-complex X.
An immersion is a combinatorial map of 2-complexes that is locally injective.
Roughly, a 2-complex X has negative immersions if, for any finite, connected
2-complex Y immersing into X, either
 (i) χ(Y ) < 0, or
 (ii) Y is homotopic to a graph.

See Definition 3.20 for a precise definition. As usual, χ(Y ) denotes the Euler
characteristic of Y . The negative immersions property is motivated by an anal-
ogy with the concept of non-positive immersions, which is defined similarly but
with (i) replaced by the inequality χ(Y ) ≤ 0. The presentation complex of any
torsion-free one-relator group has non-positive immersions [HW16, LW17].


                                       2
   The proof of Theorem A leads to various other strong constraints on the
subgroups of one-relator groups with negative immersions. The next theorem
summarises these.
Theorem B. Let G = F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ be a one-relator group with negative immersions.

 (i) Every finitely generated, one-ended subgroup H of G is co-Hopfian, i.e. H
     is not isomorphic to a proper subgroup of itself. In particular, if G itself
     is one-ended then it is co-Hopfian.
 (ii) For any integer r, there are only finitely many conjugacy classes of finitely
      generated, one-ended subgroups H of G such that the abelianisation of H
      has rational rank at most r.
(iii) Every finitely generated non-cyclic subgroup H of G is large in the sense
      of Pride, i.e. there is a subgroup H0 of finite index in H that surjects a
      non-abelian free group.
    In an earlier paper, the authors conjectured that every one-relator group
G with negative immersions is hyperbolic [LW22, Conjecture 1.9]. Theorem B
proves various consequences of this conjecture. Specifically, item (i) is consistent
with Sela’s theorem that one-ended hyperbolic groups are co-Hopfian [Sel97,
Theorem 4.4], while item (ii) is a stronger version of a subgroup rigidity theorem
of Gromov [Gro87, 5.3.C’], Rips–Sela [RS94, Theorem 7.1] and Delzant [Del95].
Note, however, that items (ii) and (iii) are not implied simply by the fact that
G is hyperbolic.
    Recently, Linton has proved the authors’ conjecture [Lin22, Theorem 8.2],
making use of Theorem B in his proof. Linton’s theorem is especially remark-
able in light of the recent discovery by Italiano–Martelli–Migliorini of higher-
dimensional non-hyperbolic groups of finite type that do not contain Baumslag–
Solitar subgroups [IMM23, Corollary 3].
    The main new technical ingredient in the proof of Theorem A is a uniform
version of negative immersions, which provides a negative upper bound for a
normalised version of the Euler characteristic. Roughly, a 2-complex X has
uniform negative immersions if there is ϵ > 0 such that for any finite, connected
2-complex Y immersing into X, either

 (i)
                                    χ(Y )
                                                 ≤ −ϵ ,
                                #{2−cells of Y }
       or
 (ii) Y can be simplified by a homotopy. (In the language developed below, Y
      is reducible.)
The reader is referred to Definition 3.24 for a precise definition.
Remark 1.4. In Wise’s work on the coherence of one-relator groups with tor-
sion [Wis20] (and also implicitly in the authors’ [LW20]), a key role is played


                                         3
by a property that Wise also calls ‘negative immersions’, but that is closer in
spirit to (indeed, stronger than) the notion of uniform negative immersions used
here. See Section 3.4 for a comparison between the notion of (uniform) negative
immersions used in this paper and Wise’s notion.
    The main new technical ingredient towards the proof of Theorem A is the fol-
lowing result, which establishes uniform negative immersions for the 2-complexes
of interest to us.
Theorem C. Let X be the presentation complex of a one-relator group. If X
has negative immersions then it has uniform negative immersions.
    The deduction of Theorem A from Theorem C is similar to [LW20] and
[Wis20], with an additional lemma (Lemma 3.10) to account for the subtle
nature of item (ii) in the definition.
    In the terminology of [Wil22], Theorem C asserts that one-relator presenta-
tion complexes with negative immersions have negative irreducible curvature.
    Theorem C follows from a rationality theorem, Theorem 4.12, similar to
those that appear in Calegari’s proof of the rationality of stable commutator
length in free groups [Cal09b] and in the second author’s work on surface sub-
groups of graphs of free groups [Wil18].
    The first idea is to expand the category of maps considered from immersions
Y ↬ X to the more general class of face-essential maps f : Y → X. This class
of maps allows branching in the centre of the 2-cells, and thus each 2-cell C of
Y comes with a well-defined degree degC (f ). The degree of the map f is then
the sum of the degrees of the 2-cells of Y , and we adjust the relevant quantities
to take it into account. The role of Euler characteristic is taken by the total
curvature
                             τ (Y ) := deg(f ) + χ(Y (1) )
where χ(Y (1) ) is the Euler characteristic of the 1-skeleton of Y , and the role
of the number of 2-cells is taken by the degree deg(f ). Note that, when f is
an immersion, these reduce to the usual quantities: τ (Y ) = χ(Y ), while deg(f )
is the number of 2-cells of Y . With these adjustments, the supremum of the
quantity
                                      τ (Y )
                                     deg(f )
over all face-essential maps f : Y → X with Y irreducible can be computed
as a solution to a rational linear programming problem; this is the content of
Theorem 4.12.
    In particular, this supremum is in fact a maximum. The results of [LW22]
then imply that this maximum is strictly negative, so provides the uniform
bound −ϵ needed to prove Theorem C.
    This proof provides no information about the value of ϵ, but we make the
following conjecture. A face-essential map of 2-complexes f : Y → X is called
essential if, for each component of Y , the induced map on 1-skeleta induces an
injective homomorphism on fundamental groups.


                                        4
Conjecture 1.5. Let G = F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ be a one-relator group and let X be the
associated presentation complex. The supremum of the quantity
                                         τ (Y )
                                        deg(f )
across all essential maps f from irreducible 2-complexes Y to X is equal to
2 − π(w).
    In an earlier version of this paper, we stated a stronger version of Conjecture
1.5 for the supremum across all face-essential maps. The next example shows
that this stronger conjecture is false.
Example 1.6. Let X be the presentation complex of
                          ⟨a, b, c, d | a4 b2 c2 d2 a3 b2 c2 d2 ⟩
and let Y be the presentation complex of
                                ⟨x, y, z | x2 yzyxz⟩ .
Write w for the relator of X and u for the relator of Y . The homomorphism of
free groups defined by
                            x, y 7→ a , z 7→ ab2 c2 d2
sends u to w and so, after subdividing the 1-skeleton of Y appropriately, defines
a combinatorial map of 2-complexes f : Y → X. Since this morphism sends the
single 2-cell of Y homeomorphically to the single 2-cell of X, f is face essential
(see Definition 2.18) and deg(f ) = 1. Furthermore, the Whitehead graph of Y
consists of two squares glued along an edge, so Y is (visibly) irreducible (see
Definition 3.1).
    However,
                         τ (Y )   deg(f ) + χ(Y(1) )
                                =                    = −1
                        deg(f )        deg(f )
while a calculation using Puder’s algorithm shows that π(w) = 4 [Cas23]. Thus,
f provides an example of a face-essential map from an irreducible 2-complex Y
such that
                               τ (Y )
                                      > 2 − π(w) .
                              deg(f )
In particular, the ‘essential’ hypothesis in Conjecture 1.5 cannot be relaxed to
‘face-essential’.
   Conjecture 1.5 has precursors in the literature. The following conjecture of
Heuer posits a surprising relationship between stable commutator length and
Puder’s primitivity rank [Heu19, Conjecture 6.3.2]. (The same conjecture was
made independently by Hanany and Puder [HP20, Conjecture 1.14].)
Conjecture 1.7 (Heuer’s conjecture). If w is a non-trivial element of the com-
mutator subgroup of a free group F then
                               2 scl(w) ≥ π(w) − 1 .


                                            5
   Conjecture 1.5 implies Heuer’s conjecture, and indeed Theorem 1.2, together
with Calegari’s rationality theorem for stable commutator length [Cal09b], un-
conditionally implies a consequence of Heuer’s conjecture.
Corollary D. If w is an element of the commutator subgroup of a free group
F and π(w) > 2 then
                              2 scl(w) > 1 .
    For context, Duncan–Howie proved that scl(w) ≥ 1/2 for any non-trivial
element of [F, F ] [DH91]. The statement of Corollary D was noted by Heuer
and Löh [HL22, Question 1.3(4)], but we will give a complete proof in §3.5 below.
The proof of Corollary D and the deduction of Corollary 1.7 from Conjecture 1.5
both use Proposition 3.28, which summarises an argument of Calegari [Cal08,
Lemma 2.7].
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 is devoted to setting up the
framework in which we describe 2-complexes and maps between them. It is
convenient to work with pre-complexes, which describe pieces that can be glued
together to form complexes. Section 3 describes the notion of irreducible com-
plexes that plays a crucial role in our definitions, and enables us to define (uni-
form) negative immersions. In Section 4, we set up the linear system needed to
prove the rationality theorem, from which Theorem C follows. The brief Sec-
tion 5 explains why one-relator groups with torsion also have uniform negative
immersions. Finally, theorems about the the subgroup structure of the funda-
mental groups of 2-complexes with uniform negative immersions are proved in
Section 6, and Theorems A and B follow immediately.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Chris Cashen for computing the primitivity
rank of Example 1.6 and the anonymous referee for numerous suggested improve-
ments to the exposition. Louder also thanks Mladen Bestvina for explaining the
tower, Wise’s ideas, and the Scott lemma to him back in Winter 2004.


2     Preliminaries
In this section, we give some foundational definitions in order to fix notation.

2.1    Graphs and pre-graphs
Graphs are our fundamental objects of study. A subgraph is always a closed
subspace in any of the standard combinatorial frameworks, but it is also conve-
nient to discuss open sub-objects of graphs. We therefore work with the slightly
more general notion of pre-graphs.
Definition 2.1 (Pre-graph). A pre-graph is a tuple

                       G = (VG , EG , ιG , τG ) = (V, E, ι, τ )


                                          6
where:
 (i) V and E are sets (the vertices and edges of G, respectively);
       ι
 (ii) EG = E ι and EG
                    τ
                      = E τ are subsets of E; and
(iii) ι : E ι → V and τ : E τ → V are maps.

The subscripts will be suppressed only when there is no danger of confusion. A
morphism f from a pre-graph G to a pre-graph H consists of maps f : VG → VH
                                   ι      ι           τ      τ
and f : EG → EH such that f (EG      ) ⊆ EH and f (EG   ) ⊆ EH , and such that
ιH ◦ f = f ◦ ιG and τH ◦ f = f ◦ τG .

   The boundary of a pre-graph G is defined to be

                                ∂G = E \ E ι ∩ E τ .

Definition 2.2 (Graph). An (oriented) graph is a pre-graph with empty bound-
ary.

    The reader is referred to the classic paper of Stallings [Sta83] for the standard
theory of the topology of graphs. Stallings phrases his arguments in terms of
Serre graphs, which differ slightly from the model of graphs we adopt here, but
his arguments are easily adapted to our context and we leave the details to the
reader. Stallings does not use pre-graphs, but again the theory is easy to adapt.

Definition 2.3 (Immersion). A morphism f : G → H of pre-graphs is an im-
mersion if, for all edges e and e′ of G, if α(e) = α(e′ ) for some α ∈ {ιG , τG }
and f (e) = f (e′ ), then e = e′ . An immersion f : G → H of pre-graphs is closed
if f (∂G) ⊆ ∂H.
  The standard fiber product construction for graphs (see [Sta83, 1.3]) also
makes sense for pre-graphs.
Definition 2.4. Consider a pair of morphisms of pre-graphs

                                    fi : Gi → H

where i = 1, 2. The fiber product G1 ×H G2 has vertex (respectively edge) set
defined to be the subset of VG1 × VG2 (respectively, EG1 × EG2 ) on which f1
and f2 agree. The attaching maps are then defined in the natural way wherever
they make sense.
   This definition coincides with the standard definition whenever G1 , G2 and
H are graphs. It enjoys various well-known properties, which are left as easy
exercises: it is a pullback in the category of pre-graphs, the pullback of an
immersion is an immersion, etc.




                                         7
2.2     Complexes and pre-complexes
Our graphs will often be the 1-skeleta of 2-dimensional complexes, which can
be formalised as immersions from disjoint unions of circles to graphs, where the
circles correspond to the boundaries of the 2-cells (which we will always call
faces). As in the case of graphs, we will sometimes want to discuss open sub-
objects, and we therefore introduce pre-complexes. In this case, slightly more
general pre-graphs can arise as the boundaries of faces.
Definition 2.5. A connected finite pre-graph is a pre-cycle if every vertex has
exactly two incident edges. A pre-cycle is a cycle if it has empty boundary, and
is an open arc otherwise.

   We can now define a pre-complex using immersions of pre-cycles.
Definition 2.6. A (2-dimensional) pre-complex X is a tuple

                                  (GX , SX , wX )

where
                             GX = (VX , EX , ιX , τX )
is a pre-graph, SX is a union of pre-cycles, and wX : SX ↬ GX is a closed
immersion. The pre-graph GX is the 1-skeleton of X, SX is the collection of
(pre-)faces of X and wX is the attaching map. For brevity, we will suppress the
subscript when there is no danger of confusion.
    A pre-complex X is a (2-dimensional) complex if the 1-skeleton GX is a
graph. Note that, in this case, every component of SX is a cycle.




Figure 1: A pre-complex (G, S, w): G is a theta graph with two half-edges
sticking off, and S is the union of two open arcs and one cycle. The map w is
a closed immersion, since it maps ∂S to ∂G.

   Graphs and complexes have natural topological realisations, which we denote
here with bold letters: the realisation of a graph G is a topological space denoted
by G and the realisation of a complex X is a topological space denoted by X. In
both cases, a morphism f functorially induces a continuous map of realisations
f.


                                        8
2.3    Asterisks and regular neighbourhoods
It is often fruitful to study graphs and 2-complexes via the local structure of
vertices. Pre-complexes provide a convenient framework for this.
Definition 2.7. An asterisk is a pre-graph with one vertex, such that E =
E ι ⊔ E τ . If the 1-skeleton of a pre-complex X is an asterisk then X is called an
asterisk pre-complex.
   Every vertex of a pre-graph or pre-complex now has a regular neighbourhood,
based on an asterisk.

Definition 2.8. Let G be a pre-graph and v be a vertex of G. The regular
neighbourhood of v is an asterisk NG (v), with vertex set {v} and edge set ι−1 (v)⊔
τ −1 (v). (Note that the disjoint union here is important: an edge e with ι(e) =
τ (e) = v defines two edges in NG (v).) The attaching maps are the unique maps
ι−1 (v) → {v} and τ −1 (v) → {v}
     Now let X = (G, S, w) be a pre-complex and v be a vertex of X. The regular
neighbourhood N = NX (v) of v is a pre-complex with 1-skeleton GN = NG (v),
i.e. the regular neighbourhood of v in the 1-skeleton G. The faces of NX (v)
are pulled back from X, so SN = S ×G GN , and the attaching map wN is the
pullback of w, i.e. the natural projection SN → GN .
    The regular neighbourhood of a vertex v carries the same information as the
link or Whitehead graph of the vertex. Indeed, any asterisk pre-complex defines
a Whitehead graph.
Definition 2.9. Let X = (G, S, w) be an asterisk pre-complex with unique
vertex v. The corresponding Whitehead graph has vertex-set equal to the edges
of X and edge-set equal to w−1 (v). Each u ∈ w−1 (v) is incident at exactly two
edges ϵ+ (v) and ϵ− (v) of S, and the attaching maps of the Whitehead graph
adjoin u to w(ϵ+ (v)) and w(ϵ− (v)).
    For v a vertex of a complex X, the Whitehead graph of the regular neigh-
bourhood N (v) coincides with the Whitehead graph Wh(v) of [Wil18]. This in
turn generalises the graph used by Whitehead in his solution to the orbit prob-
lem for automorphism groups of free groups [Whi36]. See also [Man10, CM11]
for related recent uses of Whitehead graphs.
    Edges of pre-complexes also have regular neighbourhoods.
Definition 2.10. Let X = (G, S, w) be a pre-complex and e be an edge of X.
The regular neighbourhood of e is a pre-complex N = NX (e) with 1-skeleton
GN equal to the pre-graph that has no vertices and a single edge {e}. The faces
SN of NX (e) consists of the pre-image w−1 (e), and the attaching map w is the
restriction of w to SN .
Remark 2.11. A morphism of pre-complexes or pre-graphs induces morphisms
on regular neighbourhoods: f∗ : N (x) → N (f (x)), for x a vertex or edge of the
domain.


                                        9
2.4    Various kinds of maps
Using regular neighbourhoods, we can define the various kinds of maps that will
play a role in the argument.
Definition 2.12. A morphism of pre-complexes f : X → Y is a branched map
if the induced map
                        f∗ : NX (e) → NX (f (e))
is injective for every edge e of X. If the induced map

                           f∗ : NX (v) → NX (f (v))

is injective for every vertex v of X then f is a branched immersion.
    Note that the realisation of a branched map of complexes f : X → Y
is locally injective everywhere except possibly at the centres of the faces and
the vertices, and a branched immersion is locally injective everywhere except
possibly at the centres of the faces.
    The number of times that a morphism f winds a face around its image is an
important quantity, called the degree.
Definition 2.13. Let f : X → Y be a morphism of 2-complexes. Since f :
SX → SY is a local immersion it is a covering map; in particular, for every
path-component C ⊆ SX , the restriction f : C → SY has a well-defined degree
degC (f ) ∈ N. The sum
                                     X
                       deg(f ) :=           degC (f )
                                    C∈π0 (SX )

is the degree of f . If f is a branched immersion and degC (f ) = 1 for every
component C then f is called an immersion.
Remark 2.14. In [LW20], immersions were defined in the more general context
of orbi complexes, which allow cone points in the centres of 2-cells. In this
paper, we only consider genuine 2-complexes, and the notion of immersions
from [LW20] specialises exactly to the definition given in Definition 2.13.
   Note that a morphism f is an immersion if and only if its realisation f is
locally injective. Sometimes we need to be able to modify the 1-skeleton of
a 2-complex without changing the faces. The next kind of map makes this
possible.
Definition 2.15. A morphism of finite pre-complexes f : Y → X is called
a face-embedding if the map of pre-graphs f : SY → SX is injective, and a
face-equivalence if it is a bijection.
Remark 2.16. If f : X → Y is a face-embedding of complexes then the restriction
of f to the interiors of the two-cells of X is a homeomorphism onto its image,
whence the term. Furthermore, if f : X → Y and g : Y → Z are essential face
embeddings, then the composition g ◦ f : X → Z is an essential face embedding.


                                      10
   Stallings famously popularised the folding operation for graphs [Sta83]. In
[LW22, LW20], we made use of a folding operation on morphisms of 2-complexes
that produces immersions. Here we will make use of a very natural folding
operation on morphisms of 2-complexes that produces branched immersions.
Definition 2.17. Let f : Y → X be a morphism of pre-complexes. As in
[Sta83, §3.3], the induced map of 1-skeleta f : GY → GX factors as
                                     f0          f1
                                GY → GȲ → GX
where f0 is a π1 -surjective finite composition of folds and f1 is an immersion.
The map of faces f : SY → SX factors through the fiber product GȲ ×GX SX
by the universal property; set SȲ equal to its image, and let wȲ : SȲ → GȲ be
the natural projection. The data (GȲ , SȲ , wȲ ) define a pre-complex Ȳ and f
factors as
                                      f0  f1
                                   Y → Ȳ → X
where f0 is a π1 -surjection and f1 is a branched immersion. The pre-complex
Ȳ is called the folded representative of Y , and the map f1 is called the folded
representative of f . The folded representative is characterised by its universal
property: if f factors through a branched immersion Z → X then the folded
representative f1 also factors uniquely through Z → X.
   This enables us to define the last kind of map that we will need.
Definition 2.18. A morphism of finite pre-complexes f : Y → X is called
face essential if the map to the folded representative f0 : Y → Ȳ is a face-
equivalence. If X and Y are both complexes, this is equivalent to requiring
that deg(f ) = deg(f1 ). If, in addition, the restriction of f to each connected
component of Y induces a π1 -injective map on 1-skeleta, then f is said to be
essential.
   Intuitively, a face-essential map is a map such that folding doesn’t identify
any faces.
Remark 2.19. If Y → X is a face-essential morphism of finite complexes and Ȳ
is the folded representative of Y then χ(Ȳ ) ≥ χ(Y ), with equality if and only
GY → GȲ is a homotopy equivalence.
    We will be interested in local ways of certifying that a morphism f is face-
essential. This turns out to be easier to do in a two-step process, encapsulated
by the notion of a face immersion.
Definition 2.20. A face immersion for a map f : Y → X is a factorisation
                                      f0        f1
                                   Y →Z→X
where f0 is a face-equivalence and f1 is a branched immersion.
   For brevity of notation, we will often abuse notation and use the map f to
denote a face immersion for f . A face immersion certifies that f is face-essential,
because of the following lemma.


                                           11
Lemma 2.21. Let f : Y → X be a morphism of finite 2-complexes. There is a
face immersion for f if and only if f is face-essential.
Proof. If f is face essential then the factorisation through the folded represen-
tative Ȳ defines a face immersion. Conversely, the existence of a face immersion
implies that f factors as
                                Y → Ȳ → Z → X
by the universal property of the folded representative. Since SY → SȲ is sur-
jective and the bijection SY → SZ factors through it, it is also bijective, so
Y → Ȳ is a face equivalence and hence according to Definition 2.18 f is face
essential.

2.5     Gluing pre-complexes
One advantage of working with pre-complexes is that they can be conveniently
glued to create complexes.
Definition 2.22. Let f : X → Y be a branched map of pre-complexes. Suppose
that e1 , e2 are edges of GX such that f (e1 ) = f (e2 ). Since f is a branched map,
it induces injective maps
                                    −1
                              f∗ : wX  (e1 ) → wY−1 (f (e1 ))

and
                                   −1
                             f∗ : wX  (e2 ) → wY−1 (f (e2 )) .
The edges e1 and e2 of X are said to be gluable (along f ) if
            ι           τ
  (i) e1 ∈
         / EX and e2 ∈
                     / EX , and
           −1               −1
 (ii) f∗ (wX  (e1 )) = f∗ (wX  (e2 )).
                                                       −1             −1
In this case, f induces a well-defined bijection wX        (e1 ) → wX     (e2 ).
    We can now define a new pre-complex X ′ from X by identifying e1 and e2
to a common edge e. Set ι(e) = ι(e2 ) (if it exists) and τ (e) = τ (e1 ) (if it exists).
              −1                                                 −1
Each edge wX     (e1 ) corresponds to a unique edge ϵ2 ∈ wX         (e2 ) under the above
                                                                                    −1
bijection, and in X ′ these two edges are identified to a common edge ϵ ∈ wX         ′ (e),

with ι(ϵ) = ι(ϵ2 ) (if it exists) and τ (ϵ) = τ (ϵ1 ) (if it exists). Finally, note that
f descends to a well-defined branched map f : X ′ → Y .
    The resulting pre-complex X ′ is said to be constructed from X by gluing e1
and e2 (along f ).
    Gluing can be used to reassemble a complex from the regular neighbourhoods
of its vertices.
Remark 2.23. Let X be a finite complex, and let N be the disjoint union of
the regular neighbourhoods of the vertices of X. Then N is naturally equipped
with a branched immersion N → X, and X can be reconstructed from N by
gluing the edges in pairs.


                                            12
3      Irreducible complexes
The properties of non-positive immersions, negative immersions and uniform
negative immersions have a common theme. Given an immersion of finite 2-
complexes Y → X, if the Euler characteristic χ(Y ) is not negative enough,
then Y can be simplified. The exact sense in which Y can be simplified is of
crucial importance to the definition of uniform negative immersions. In the
next subsection we define irreducible complexes, and with these definitions in
hand we can give the correct definitions of non-positive, negative and uniformly
negative immersions.

3.1      Unfolding
We are interested in ways that a finite 2-dimensional complex X might be
homotopic to a point. The next definition summarises various ways in which X
either is a point or can be simplified.
Definition 3.1 (Visibly reducible and irreducible pre-complexes). A finite pre-
complex X is visibly reducible if any one of the following four conditions hold:

  (i) some component of X is a point;
 (ii) the 1-skeleton G has a vertex of valence 1;
(iii) X has a free face — that is, an edge e of the 1-skeleton G with #w−1 (e) =
      1;

(iv) a vertex v of X separates its regular neighbourhood NX (v), so NX (v)\{v}
     is disconnected.
A fifth kind of reduction also plays an important role:
 (v) a vertex v of X has an incident edge e such that the union v ∪ e separates
     the regular neighbourhood NX (v).
If none of conditions (i)-(v) hold then X is called visibly irreducible. If condition
(v) holds but none of conditions (i)-(iv) hold, then X is called unfold-able 1 . See
Figure 2 for a concrete example of an unfold-able 2-complex.

     If neither of conditions (i) or (ii) hold then the 1-skeleton of X is a core graph.
Recall that a graph is called core if every vertex is in the image of an immersed
cycle. Henceforth, we will always implicitly assume that the 1-skeleton of any
2-complex we consider is a core graph.
     The conditions of Definition 3.1 can also be phrased naturally in terms of
Whitehead graphs: see for instance [Wil18, Lemma 2.10] for a similar list of
conditions. Recall from [Sta83] that a morphism of graphs f : G → H is a fold
if it identifies just a single pair of edges e1 , e2 , incident at a common vertex.
    1 The hyphen is to resolve an ambiguity: we mean that such a pre-complex can be unfolded,

not that it cannot be folded.


                                             13
Definition 3.2. A fold of graphs is called essential if it is injective on fundamen-
tal groups. A morphism of graphs f : G → H is called an essential equivalence
if it is a composition of essential folds, or equivalently, it is an isomorphism
on fundamental groups. A face-essential morphism of complexes f : Y → X
is called an essential equivalence if the map of 1-skeleta f : GY → GX is an
essential equivalence of graphs. In this case, we also say that Y is an essential
unfolding of X.
    Note that, if f : Y → X is an essential equivalence of complexes, then the
realisation f is a homotopy equivalence.
    The next lemma, which is a restatement of [Wil18, Lemma 2.8] in the ter-
minology of this paper, explains the relationship between Definition 3.1(v) and
(un)folding.
Lemma 3.3. If a finite complex X is unfold-able then there is a finite complex
X ′ and an essential fold f : X ′ → X.
    Unfolding preserves the number of edges of the faces while increasing the
number of vertices and edges of the 1-skeleton, so it is not hard to see that
Lemma 3.3 can only be applied finitely many times before producing a complex
which is either visibly reducible or visibly irreducible. The next lemma is a
restatement of [Wil18, Lemma 2.11] in the terminology of this paper.
Lemma 3.4. For any finite complex X, there is a finite complex X ′ and an
essential equivalence f : X ′ → X such that X ′ is either visibly reducible or
visibly irreducible.
    We say that X unfolds to X ′ . To summarise, unfold-able complexes may be
either reducible or irreducible, but their status can be determined by unfolding.
Definition 3.5 (Reducibility and irreducibility). If a finite 2-complex X unfolds
to a visibly reducible complex X ′ (with the 1-skeleton still a core graph) then
X is said to be reducible. Likewise, if X unfolds to a visibly irreducible complex
X ′ then X is said to be irreducible.
   Note that an irreducible 2-complex is not required to be connected.
Remark 3.6. The terminology ‘irreducible’ has been used in several papers re-
lated to this one, such as [LW17, LW22, LW20, Wil18]. Although the usage
was always similar to its definition given here, it was not always identical, so
the reader is advised to check the definition in the cited paper when a result is
quoted.
    It is not immediately obvious that a complex X cannot be both reducible and
irreducible, since X may admit many different unfoldings. Indeed, a 2-complex
may have several unfoldings, as the next example illustrates.
Example 3.7. Let X be a 2-complex defined as follows. The 1-skeleton of X is a
‘spectacles’ or ‘bar-bell’ graph, with two vertices u1 and u2 , and edges a1 , a2 , b,
where each ai is a loop starting and ending at ui , and b joins u1 to u2 . The


                                         14
Figure 2: The central diagram illustrates the complex X from Example 3.7: the
1-skeleton is coloured red, and the single face is attached along the black curve.
It admits two different unfoldings, each a realisation of a torus.


single face C of X is attached along the loop labelled by the commutator of
a1 and ba2 b−1 . Now X admits two different unfoldings, each with realisation
homeomorphic to the torus: one is obtained by dividing u1 into two vertices,
the other is obtained by dividing u2 into two vertices.
    Many further examples of this type can be constructed by taking any cellular
decomposition X ′ of a surface and performing an essential fold to obtain a
complex X; such an X can always be unfolded in two ways.
    Nevertheless, a famous lemma of Whitehead [Whi36] implies that (ir)reducibility
is equivalent to various group-theoretic properties of the conjugacy classes in the
free group F = π1 (G) represented by the components of S. Combined with the
material of this section, Whitehead’s lemma (see, for instance, [Wil18, Lemma
2.10] for a suitable statement), gives the following proposition.

Proposition 3.8. Let X be a finite connected complex. Let F be the fun-
damental group of the 1-skeleton GX , and let {w1 , . . . , wn } be a finite set of
representatives for the conjugacy classes of F determined by the components of
S. The complex X is reducible if and only if one of the following three conditions
hold:

 (i) F is trivial and n = 0;
 (ii) F is infinite cyclic, n ≤ 1 and, if n = 1, F = ⟨w1 ⟩;
(iii) there is a non-trivial free splitting F = A ∗ B such that, for each i, wi is
      conjugate into either A or B.

    Since the conditions of Proposition 3.8 are group-theoretic and are not al-
tered by homotopy-equivalences of the 1-skeleta (once we have ensured that
they are core graphs), it follows that every finite complex is either reducible or
irreducible.

3.2    Irreducible cores
Since this notion of irreducibility is slightly stronger than those used in [LW17,
LW22], we will need some lemmas that enable us to improve unfold-able com-
plexes to irreducible ones, under suitable hypotheses on the fundamental group.


                                        15
Definition 3.9. A group Γ is freely decomposable if Γ splits as a non-trivial
free product Γ = A ∗ B. Otherwise Γ is said to be freely indecomposable.
   A 2-complex X can be replaced by a visibly irreducible one, as long as the
fundamental group is complicated enough.

Lemma 3.10. Let X be a finite, connected 2-complex, and suppose that π1 (X)
is neither freely decomposable nor free. Then there is a visibly irreducible 2-
complex X ′ and an essential face-embedding X ′ → X, which is also an isomor-
phism on fundamental groups.
Proof. The proof proceeds by induction on the number of faces of X. By Lemma
3.4, there is an essential equivalence X ′ → X such that X ′ is either visibly re-
ducible or visibly irreducible. If X ′ is visibly irreducible the result is immediate;
otherwise, X ′ is visibly reducible. Since π1 (X) ∼    = π1 (X ′ ) is non-trivial, X ′ is
not a point, and we may assume that the 1-skeleton of X ′ is a core graph.
    If X ′ has a free face, collapsing it exhibits a sub-complex X ′′ ⊆ X ′ which
is a deformation retract of X ′ with fewer faces. Note also that the inclusion of
X ′′ into X ′ is an essential face-embedding. Therefore, the result holds for X ′′ ,
and hence for X ′ , by the inductive hypothesis.
    Finally, suppose that X ′ has a locally separating vertex v. Since π1 (X ′ ) is
freely indecomposable and not infinite cyclic, v must be separating, and cutting
X ′ along v realises X ′ as a wedge

                                   X ′ = X1 ∨ X2 .

Note that the inclusion maps Xi ,→ X ′ are essential. Since every free splitting
of π1 (X ′ ) is trivial, X2 is simply connected, without loss of generality. Since the
1-skeleton of X ′ is a core graph, X2 is not a tree, and must therefore include at
least one face. Hence X1 has fewer faces than X, and so the lemma holds for X1
by the inductive hypothesis. Since X1 → X ′ is an isomorphism on fundamental
groups, the result also holds for X, which completes the proof.
   As in Example 3.7, the complex X ′ furnished by Lemma 3.10 may not be
unique. However, we can make it unique by folding.
Definition 3.11. Let X be finite, connected 2-complex with π1 (X) neither
freely decomposable nor free. Let f : X ′ → X be provided by Lemma 3.10,
and let Xb → X be the immersion provided by folding f . Then X
                                                             b is called an
irreducible core for X.
Remark 3.12. Since X ′ → X is essential, X ′ is an essential unfolding of X. b
                      ′
In particular, since X is visibly irreducible, it follows that X is irreducible.
                                                               b
Also, since X ′ → X is a π1 -isomorphism and factors through the π1 -surjection
X ′ → X,
       b the immersion X b → X is a π1 -isomorphism.
   We can also characterise irreducible cores group-theoretically. Let X =
(GX , SX , wX ) be a compact, connected 2-complex. The fundamental group of
the 1-skeleton GX is a finitely generated free group F . The images of the circles


                                           16
SX under the attaching map wX define a collection of conjugacy classes of cyclic
subgroups {⟨w1 ⟩, . . . , ⟨wn ⟩} of F . Grushko’s theorem implies the existence of a
maximal splitting
                                    F = F1 ∗ . . . ∗ Fk ,
such that each wi is conjugate into some Fj . (If we combine the Fj that do not
contain any of the wi into a common free factor H, then this gives the relative
Grushko decomposition of the pair (F, {⟨wi ⟩}).) If Γj is the quotient of Fj by
the conjugates of the wi contained in Fj , then this gives a natural free-product
decomposition
                                Γ = Γ1 ∗ . . . ∗ Γk
of Γ = π1 (X). If Γ is neither freely decomposable nor free, then exactly one of
these factors – without loss of generality, Γ1 – must be non-trivial. Now, X
                                                                           b can
be defined as follows: the 1-skeleton is the Stallings core of the subgroup F1 of
F = π1 (GX ), and the faces correspond to those wi that are conjugate into F1 .
    We shall see that irreducible cores enjoy a universal property. Before we
prove that, we need to notice that unfolds can be pulled back along branched
immersions.
Lemma 3.13. Let Y → X be a branched immersion, and suppose that X ′ → X
is an essential fold. Then there is an essential unfolding Y ′ → Y such that the
composition Y ′ → X factors through X ′ → X.
Proof. Such an unfolding of X means that there is an edge e with endpoints u
and v such that e and v together separate the regular neighbourhood NX (v),
so it can be written as a union

                              NX (v) = N1 ∪e∪v N2 .

Let v1 , . . . , vn be the pre-images of v in Y and let ei be the pre-images of e
incident at vi , if it exists. For each i, NY (vi ) embeds in NX (v), and so either
NY (vi ) maps into one of N1 or N2 , or NY (vi ) is separated by ei ∪ vi . The
unfolding Y ′ is now constructed by unfolding each of these separating ei in
turn.

   Using this, we can now prove the claimed universal property for irreducible
cores.
Lemma 3.14. Let Y → X be a branched immersion of finite, connected 2-
complexes that is non-trivial on fundamental groups. Suppose that Y is irre-
                                                                         b →X
ducible and that π1 (X) is neither freely decomposable nor free, and let X
be an irreducible core of X. Then the morphism Y → X factors through the
map X b → X.

Proof. Recall that the irreducible core X
                                        b is constructed by folding an inductively
                           ′
constructed morphism X → X. The lemma is proved by arguing that there is
an essential unfolding Y ′ → Y that lifts to X ′ .



                                        17
    Consider the inductive construction of X ′ from Lemma 3.10, which is a finite
sequence of unfoldings and inclusions of sub-complexes. Lemma 3.13 handles
the case of unfoldings. It remains to deal with the two cases of the argument
that pass to subcomplexes of an unfolding X ′ of X.
    In the first case, X ′ has a face C that is a free face, and X ′′ ⊆ X ′ is the
subcomplex obtained by collapsing that free face. Since Y ′ → X ′ is a branched
immersion, if any face D of Y ′ maps to C then D is also a free face, so Y ′ is
visibly reducible, contradicting the hypothesis that Y is irreducible. Therefore
C is not in the image of Y ′ , and so the map Y ′ → X ′ restricts to X ′′ .
    In the second case, X ′ has a locally separating vertex and splits as a wedge
X1 ∨X2 with X2 simply connected. Since Y ′ → X ′ is a branched immersion and
no vertex of Y ′ is locally separating, it follows that the image of Y is contained
entirely inside either X1 or X2 , and since Y ′ → X ′ is non-trivial on fundamental
groups, it must be X1 , as required. This completes the proof that Y unfolds to
some Y ′ such that Y ′ → X lifts to X ′ .
    To complete the proof, we fold Y ′ to construct a 2-complex Yb . Since X b →X
and Y → X are branched immersions, there is a well-defined fibre-product 2-
complex Y ×X X,  b with 1-skeleton equal to the fibre product of graphs GY ×G
                                                                                   X

GXb and faces given by pulling back the faces of Y and X. b The universal property
of the fibre product now provides a canonical map Y ′ → Y ×X X,      b and Yb is the
result of folding this map. By construction, the natural map Y → X factors
                                                                     b
through X.b
    Finally, since the identity map on Y is the folded representative of the map
Y ′ → Y , the universal property of folded representatives provides a canonical
morphism Y → Yb , and since Yb → X factors through X,      b the result follows.

Remark 3.15. The universal property of Lemma 3.14 implies in the usual way
that irreducible cores are unique up to canonical isomorphism. We may therefore
speak of the irreducible core of a finite, connected 2-complex X, as long as π1 (X)
is neither freely decomposable nor free.
Remark 3.16. The irreducible core of a connected 2-complex X can also be
characterised group-theoretically. Let F be the fundamental group of the 1-
skeleton, and let ⟨w1 ⟩, . . . , ⟨wn ⟩ be the cyclic subgroups of F defined (up to
conjugacy) by the faces of X. The pair (F, {⟨w1 ⟩, . . . , ⟨wm ⟩}) has a relative
Grushko decomposition F = F1 ∗ . . . ∗ Fn . Each wi is conjugate into a unique
Fj(i) and so, after conjugating the wi , the pair (F, {⟨wi ⟩}) decomposes as a free
product of pairs (Fk , {⟨wi ⟩ | j(i) = k}). If π1 (X) is neither freely decomposable
nor free, then there is a unique index k such that Fk /⟨⟨wi | j(i) = k⟩⟩ is neither
freely decomposable nor free. The 1-skeleton of the irreducible core X      b is given
by the core graph associated to the subgroup Fk of F , and the 2-cells are given
by the set {wi | j(i) = k}.
    The results of this section guarantee that X has an irreducible core if it is
neither freely decomposable nor free. However, the converse is not true: X may
be irreducible, and yet π1 (X) may be trivial, free, freely indecomposable etc.



                                         18
For instance, the complex associated to the presentation

                              ⟨a, b | baba−2 , abab−2 ⟩

of the trivial group is irreducible.

3.3    Curvature conditions
With the definitions of irreducibility in hand, we can now define non-positive
and negative immersions. These definitions are inspired by Wise [Wis03, Wis20],
and similar definitions have played a role in several recent papers about one-
relator groups, such as [HW16, LW17, LW22]. They are also naturally related to
the work of Martı́nez-Pedroza and Wise on sectional curvature for 2-complexes
[Wis04, Wis08, MPW13].
    It turns out that Wise’s original definitions are too strong to prove Theo-
rem A. Here we will give slightly less restrictive definitions, using the notion of
irreducible complexes from the last section. See Section 3.4 below for a com-
parison between our definitions and Wise’s. As usual, χ(X) denotes the Euler
characteristic of a complex X.
Definition 3.17. A finite 2-complex X has non-positive immersions if, for
every immersion of finite complexes Y ↬ X, either

 (i) χ(Y ) ≤ 0, or
 (ii) Y is reducible.
    The non-positive immersions property for presentation complexes of one-
relator groups was proved in [HW16] and [LW17].
    The next definition is motivated by the observation that, if f : Y → X is an
immersion, then deg(f ) is equal to the number of faces of Y , and can be thought
of as a useful adaptation of Euler characteristic to the setting of branched maps.
Definition 3.18. Let f : Y → X be a branched map of 2-complexes, and let
G be the 1-skeleton of Y . The quantity

                              τ (f ) := deg(f ) + χ(G)

is called the total curvature of f . We will usually abuse notation and write τ (Y )
for τ (f ), since τ (f ) = χ(Y ) when f is an immersion.
    Indeed, the techniques of both papers [HW16, LW17] prove something slightly
stronger than non-positive immersions: the map can be taken to be a branched
immersion, and the complex Y is only required to not be visibly reducible. For
instance, [LW17, Theorem 1.2] can be stated as follows, after accounting for
small differences in terminology.
Theorem 3.19. Let X be the presentation complex of a torsion-free one-relator
group. If Y is a finite complex and Y → X is a branched immersion then either


                                         19
 (i) τ (Y ) ≤ 0, or
 (ii) Y has a free face, and in particular is visibly reducible.
   The definition of negative immersions is a natural adaptation of Definition
3.17. Again, this definition assumes a slightly stronger notion of irreducibility
than was used in [LW22].
Definition 3.20. A finite 2-complex X has negative immersions if, for every
immersion of finite complexes Y → X, either
 (i) χ(Y ) < 0, or

 (ii) Y is reducible.
    The property of negative immersions for one-relator groups was characterised
in [LW22], in which Theorem 1.2 was proved.
Remark 3.21. In [LW22, Definition 1.1], a 2-complex X is defined to have neg-
ative immersions if, for every immersion of finite complexes Y → X, either
χ(Y ) < 0 or Y Nielsen reduces to a graph. To say that Y Nielsen reduces to
a graph means that there is a homotopy equivalence of 1-skeleta Y(1) ≃ Z(1)
so that the 2-complex Z obtained by attaching the 2-cells of Y to Z(1) in the
natural way is the result of wedging discs to a graph.
     Let us briefly explain why Definition 3.20 agrees with [LW22, Definition 1.1].
To this end, let Y → X be an immersion of finite 2-complexes, and assume that
χ(Y ) ≥ 0. If X satisfies [LW22, Definition 1.1] then Y Nielsen reduces to a
graph, and then Y is reducible by Proposition 3.8.
     To prove the converse, assume that X satisfies Definition 3.20, and proceed
by induction on the number of 2-cells of Y . Since χ(Y ) ≥ 0, Y is reducible by
assumption, and Proposition 3.8 applies. Items (i) and (ii) of the proposition
correspond to the base cases of the induction where Y is a point, a circle or a disc.
If item (iii) of Proposition 3.8 applies, then Y unfolds to a 2-complex Y ′ with a
locally separating vertex v. Cutting along v yields a (possibly disconnected) new
2-complex Y1′ , which folds to a 2-complex Y1 immersing into Y with χ(Y1 ) =
χ(Y ) + 1. Repeating this process n times leads to a sequence of immersed
2-complexes
                            Yn → Yn−1 → . . . → Y1 → Y
with χ(Yn ) = χ(Y ) + n ≥ n, each with the same number of 2-cells as Y . Note
that, for each n, Y is Nielsen equivalent to the result of wedging Yn to a graph.
    For large enough n, Yn must have a free face. Indeed, let m be the number of
2-cells of Y and let l be their total edge length. Then, unless Yn has a free face,
it has at most l/2 edges and hence, since every vertex has valence at least 2, it
has at most l/2 vertices, so χ(Yn ) ≤ l/2 + m. Therefore, Yn must have a free
face for n > l/2 + m, as claimed. Collapsing a free face in such a Yn produces
a new 2-complex Y ′ with χ(Y ′ ) ≥ 0 and with fewer 2-cells than Y . Now Y ′
Nielsen reduces to a graph by induction, and hence so does Y , as required.



                                         20
   Theorem 1.2 gives a useful statement, but the following more precise state-
ment is an immediate consequence of [LW22, Lemma 6.11], after noticing that
the proof of that result works equally well if immersions are replaced by branched
immersions and χ is replaced by τ .
Theorem 3.22. Let X be the presentation complex of a torsion-free one-relator
group G = F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ with negative immersions. If Y is a finite complex and
f : Y → X is a branched immersion then either
 (i) τ (Y ) < 0, or
 (ii) Y is reducible.
   Below, we will need the following improvement of this statement to the
context of face-essential maps,
Corollary 3.23. Let X be the presentation complex of a torsion-free one-relator
group G = F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ with negative immersions. If Y is a finite complex and
f : Y → X is a face-essential map then either
 (i) τ (Y ) < 0, or
 (ii) Y is reducible.
Proof. Consider the folded representative
                                   Y → Ȳ → X
so Ȳ → X is a branched immersion. Since Y → X is face essential,
                                  τ (Y ) ≤ τ (Ȳ ) ,
because deg f is equal to the degree of its folded representative, with equality if
and only if Y → Ȳ is an essential equivalence. Suppose now that τ (Y ) = 0, so
τ (Ȳ ) ≥ 0. There are two cases to consider: either τ (Ȳ ) = 0 or τ (Ȳ ) > 0.
     In the first case, τ (Ȳ ) = 0 so Y → Ȳ is an essential equivalence. Theorem
3.22 then implies that Ȳ is reducible. Since reducibility is equivalent to the
group-theoretic criteria of Proposition 3.8, it follows that Y is also reducible,
because Y → Ȳ is an essential equivalence.
     In the second case, τ (Ȳ ) > 0 so, by Theorem 3.19, Ȳ has a free face, whence
Y also has a free face, and so is visibly reducible.
   Finally, we are ready to give a definition of uniform negative immersions.
Definition 3.24. A finite 2-complex X has uniform negative immersions if
there is ϵ > 0 so that, for every immersion of finite complexes Y ↬ X, either
 (i)
                                    χ(Y )
                                                 ≤ −ϵ ,
                                #{2−cells of Y }
       or
 (ii) Y is reducible.
   Theorem C asserts that presentation complexes of one-relator groups with
negative immersions also have uniform negative immersions.


                                         21
3.4      Wise’s notion of negative immersions
We finish this section by contrasting Definition 3.24 with the following definition
of Wise.
Definition 3.25. A finite 2-complex X has negative immersions in the sense of
Wise if there is ϵ > 0 so that, for every immersion of finite complexes Y ↬ X,
either
  (i)
                                          χ(Y )
                                                       ≤ −ϵ ,
                                      #{2−cells of Y }
        or
 (ii) Y has a free face.
   In [Wis20], Wise proves that every one-relator group with torsion G is coher-
ent by showing that a presentation complex for (some finite-index subgroup of)
G satisfies Definition 3.25, and then proving that this in turn implies coherence.
The independent proof given in [LW20] can also be viewed this way.
   Clearly, negative immersions in the sense of Wise implies our notions of
negative immersions and uniform negative immersions. The following example
shows that this implication is not reversible [Wis20].
Example 3.26. Let X be the 2-complex associated to the presentation G =
F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩, where F is the free group ⟨a, b, c⟩ and

                                    w := ab2 c2 ab2 c2 b2 c2 .

By setting a′ = ab2 c2 , this presentation can be seen to be Nielsen equivalent2
to
                                ⟨a′ , b, c | (a′ )2 b2 c2 ⟩ ,
the standard presentation of the fundamental group of the surface of Euler
characteristic −1. In particular, G is 2-free and so X has negative immersions
by Theorem 1.2, and indeed uniform negative immersions by Theorem C.
    We now define a compact 2-complex Y and an immersion to X. The 1-
skeleton of Y is a rose with two petals labelled α and β, and immerses into X
via the assignment
                             f : α 7→ a , β 7→ b2 c2 ,
while a single face is attached along the word u(α, β) = αβαβ 2 . Since f (u(α, β)) =
w(a, b, c), the immersion of 1-skeleta extends to an immersion Y ↬ X. Clearly
χ(Y ) = 0, but since both α and β appear at least twice in u, Y has no free face.
Therefore, Y does not have negative immersions in the sense of Wise.
   2 Recall that two presentations are Nielsen equivalent if one is taken to the other by applying

a free-group automorphism to the generators.




                                               22
    The immersion Y ↬ X does not contradict our definitions of (uniform)
negative immersions (Definitions 3.20 and 3.24), since u is a primitive element
of the free group ⟨α, β⟩, and so the complex Y is reducible by Proposition 3.8.
    Example 3.26 shows that one cannot prove Theorem A by showing that all
such complexes satisfy Definition 3.25. It also illustrates another important
difference between the definitions: since the standard presentation complex for
the surface of Euler characteristic −1 does have negative immersions in the
sense of Definition 3.25, that notion is not invariant under Nielsen equivalence,
whereas Definitions 3.20 and 3.24 are, by Remark 3.16.

3.5    Stable commutator length
Commutator length and its stabilisation provide natural quantifications of the
complexity of an element of a commutator subgroup. See Calegari’s monograph
for a comprehensive treatment of stable commutator length [Cal09a].
Definition 3.27. The commutator length of an element g of the commutator
subgroup of a group G is
                                            n
                                            Y
                cl(g) = min{n ∈ N | g =         [xi , yi ] , xi , yi ∈ G} ,
                                            i=1

the minimal n such that g is a product of n commutators. The stable commutator
length is defined to be
                                            cl(g n )
                               scl(g) = inf          .
                                        n∈N    n
   The purpose of this section is to prove Corollary D, and also to explain why
Conjecture 1.5 implies Conjecture 1.7. Both follow from the next proposition,
which is due to Calegari [Cal08, Lemma 2.7]. Nevertheless, in order to clarify
how the argument works in the setting of this paper, we give the proof here.
   A 2-complex is called a surface if its realisation is homeomorphic to a closed,
2-dimensional surface.
Proposition 3.28 (Calegari). Let X be the presentation complex of a one-
relator group F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ and suppose that w ∈ [F, F ]. There is an essential branched
map from an orientable surface f : Σb → X such that

                              τ (Σ)
                                 b
                                     = 1 − 2 scl(w) .
                             deg(f )
Proof. As above, the data of X consists of a map w : S ↬ G, where G is the
1-skeleton and w is the attaching map of the unique face. An admissible surface
is a commutative diagram of continuous maps of topological spaces
                                  ∂Σ              Σ

                                        w
                                   S              G

                                       23
such that Σ is a compact surface without spherical components, ∂Σ → Σ is
the natural inclusion of the boundary and ∂Σ → S is an orientation-preserving
covering map. Calegari showed that

                                             χ(Σ)
                             scl(w) ≤ −             ,                        (1)
                                          2 deg(∂Σ)

where deg(∂Σ) denotes the degree of the covering map ∂Σ → S, for any admis-
sible surface [Cal09a, Proposition 2.10]. If equality is realised, so

                                             χ(Σ)
                             scl(w) = −             ,                        (2)
                                          2 deg(∂Σ)

then Σ is said to be extremal. Calegari’s rationality theorem [Cal09b] (see also
the account in [Cal09a, Theorem 4.24]) asserts that an extremal surface Σ exists
whenever w ∈ [F, F ].
    A lemma of Culler [Cul81] (which is also implicit in the proof of Calegari’s
theorem) implies that Σ has a spine Σ0 such that the map Σ → G factors as the
composition of a deformation retraction Σ → Σ0 with a morphism of graphs
Σ0 → G. Let Σ  b be the closed surface obtained by gluing discs to the boundary
components of Σ. Then Σ   b naturally has the structure of a 2-complex Σ  b with
1-skeleton Σ0 , and the map Σ → G extends to a morphism of 2-complexes
f :Σb → X.
    The extremality equation (2) can be rearranged to give the required relation-
ship between total curvature and stable commutator length. Indeed, because
the 1-skeleton of Σ
                  b is a deformation retract of Σ,

                 τ (f ) = deg(f ) + χ(Σ) = deg(f )(1 − 2 scl(w))

which gives the required equation.
    It now remains to show that f is essential. This follows from a lemma of
Calegari [Cal08, Lemma 2.7], which in turn relies on the subgroup separability
of free groups, proved by Marshall Hall Jr [Jr49]. For completeness, we outline
the proof.
    Suppose that f is not π1 -injective on some connected component of the 1-
skeleton. Then there is a homotopically essential closed curve γ on Σ such that
f ◦ γ is homotopically trivial in G. Since π1 (Σ) is subgroup separable there
is, for some finite d, a d-sheeted covering space Σ1 → Σ such that, after a
homotopy, γ lifts to a simple closed curve γ1 on Σ1 . Let Σ2 be the result of
surgery on Σ1 along γ1 ; that is, Σ2 is constructed by cutting Σ1 along γ1 and
gluing in two discs along the resulting boundary components. Since γ1 maps to
a null-homotopic curve in G, f extends to a map Σ2 → G that makes Σ2 into




                                       24
an admissible surface. We now calculate:
                              χ(Σ2 )          χ(Σ1 ) + 2
                       −                 = −
                           2 deg(∂Σ2 )       2 deg(∂Σ1 )
                                                χ(Σ1 )
                                         < −
                                             2 deg(∂Σ1 )
                                                dχ(Σ)
                                         = −
                                             2d deg(∂Σ)
                                         = scl(w)

contradicting (1). Hence, f is π1 -injective on each connected component.
    Now suppose that f is not face-essential. Then the map from Σ  b to its folded
representative is not injective on faces, so there are distinct points x, y ∈ ∂Σ
with the same image in Σ0 , the folded representative of the spine. Fix any path
α in Σ from x to y. The image of α in Σ0 is a loop and so, since the map
Σ → Σ0 is surjective on fundamental groups, we may concatenate α with a
loop in Σ so that its image in Σ0 , and hence in G, is null-homotopic. That is
to say, we may choose α so that f ◦ α is a null-homotopic loop. Next, as above,
modify α by a homotopy and pass to a d-sheeted cover Σ1 → Σ so that α lifts
to an embedded arc α1 .
    Let Σ2 be constructed by attaching an interval β1 to ∂Σ1 at the endpoints of
α1 and thickening it to a 1-handle. The map f extends over this 1-handle and,
after a homotopy to ensure that ∂Σ2 → S is a covering map, this makes Σ2 into
an admissible surface. Note that χ(Σ2 ) = χ(Σ1 ) − 1 and deg(∂Σ2 ) = deg(∂Σ1 ).
The concatenation of α1 and β1 defines an embedded loop γ2 in Σ2 such that
f ◦ γ2 is null-homotopic so, as in the proof of π1 -injectivity, we may perform
surgery on γ2 to obtain a new admissible surface Σ3 . As before, we calculate:

                              χ(Σ3 )          χ(Σ2 ) + 2
                       −                 = −
                           2 deg(∂Σ3 )       2 deg(∂Σ2 )
                                              χ(Σ1 ) + 1
                                         = −
                                             2 deg(∂Σ1 )
                                                χ(Σ1 )
                                         < −
                                             2 deg(∂Σ1 )
                                                dχ(Σ)
                                         = −
                                             2d deg(∂Σ)
                                         = scl(w)

which, again, contradicts (1). Hence, f is face-essential as claimed.
   Corollary D now follows quickly from Corollary 3.23 and Proposition 3.28.
Proof of Corollary D. By Theorem 1.2, the hypothesis that π(w) > 2 is equiv-
alent to the statement that X has negative immersions. Consider the face-
              b → X provided by Proposition 3.28. Since Σ
essential map Σ                                         b is a closed surface


                                         25
each condition of Definition 3.1 can be easily checked, and we see that Σ  b is
(visibly) irreducible. Combining Corollary 3.23 and Proposition 3.28 then gives

                                               τ (Σ)
                                                  b
                            1 − 2 scl(w) =            <0
                                              deg(f )
as required.
   The proposition also immediately implies that Heuer’s conjecture follows
from our Conjecture 1.5.
Corollary 3.29. Conjecture 1.5 implies Conjecture 1.7.
Proof. Let w ∈ [F, F ] be non-trivial and let X be the presentation complex
of the associated one-relator group F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩. Applying Conjecture 1.5 to the
                  b → X provided by Proposition 3.28 gives
essential map f : Σ

                                          τ (Σ)
                                             b
                        1 − 2 scl(w) =           ≤ 2 − π(w)
                                         deg(f )
which rearranges to give 2 scl(w) ≥ π(w) − 1, as required.


4     A linear system
The principal extra ingredient in the proof of Theorem C is Theorem 4.12, a
rationality theorem in the spirit of the main results of [Cal09b] and [Wil18].
Fix a finite 2-complex X. The idea is to encode face immersions from visibly
irreducible complexes to X as the integral points of a system of linear equations
and inequations.

4.1    Vertex and edge pieces
Consider a face-essential morphism f : Y → X with Y visibly irreducible, and
a face immersion
                                   f0   f1
                                 Y →Z→X
for f . The variables of the linear system count the combinatorial types of the
vertices of Z and their preimages in Y . These are encoded as maps between
(disjoint unions of) asterisk pre-complexes.
Definition 4.1. A vertex piece P over a 2-complex X is a face immersion

                               Y (P ) → Z(P ) → X

where Y (P ) is visibly irreducible and and Z(P ) is an asterisk pre-complex. (In
particular, Y (P ) is a disjoint union of asterisk pre-complexes.) Vertex pieces are
considered up to the natural notion of isomorphism: if there are isomorphisms
of pre-complexes Y (P ) → Y (Q) and Z(P ) → Z(Q) commuting with the maps
Y (•) → Z(•) → X then P and Q are isomorphic.


                                         26
                     Figure 3: An example of a vertex piece.


   For a 2-complex X, the set P = P(X) of isomorphism types of vertex pieces
over vertices of X indexes the variables of our linear system. It is of crucial
importance that there are only finitely many variables.
Lemma 4.2. If X is a finite complex then P is finite.
Proof. Every regular neighbourhood N (v) is finite. Since Z(P ) → NX (v) is
a branched immersion from an asterisk pre-complex it is injective, so there
are only finitely many possible combinatorial types for Z(P ) and the map to
NX (v). Since Y (P ) → Z(P ) is a face-equivalence, the cardinality of SY (P ) is also
bounded. Finally, since Y (P ) is visibly irreducible, each edge and vertex of Y (P )
has at least two pre-images in SY (P ) , so the cardinality of GZ(P ) is also bounded.
So there are at most boundedly many different possible isomorphism types for
Y (P ), and hence also only boundedly many possible maps Y (P ) → Z(P ).

    The vertex pieces will define the variables of our linear system. Edge pieces
will give the defining equations. An edge pre-complex is a pre-complex whose
underlying pre-graph consists of a single edge and no vertices.
Definition 4.3. An edge piece R over an edge e of a 2-complex X consists of
a face immersion
                           Y (R) → Z(R) → X
where Z(R) is an edge pre-complex. Again, edge pieces are considered up to
the natural notion of isomorphism.

   Let E = E(X) denote the set of isomorphism types of edge pieces over edges
of X.

4.2    Weight vectors
Fix a finite 2-complex X. Again, consider a face immersion
                                       f0        f1
                                    Y →Z→X


                                            27
for a face-essential morphism f : Y → X with Y visibly irreducible. Although
this face immersion is our actual object of study, we will often abuse notation
and just denote it by f , or even Y .
Definition 4.4. Each vertex v of Z defines an induced vertex-piece P ≡ PY (v)
over f1 (v) as follows:

  (i) Z(P ) := NZ (v);
               `
 (ii) Y (P ) := f0 (u)=v NY (u).

The morphisms Y (P ) → Z(P ) → X are the natural induced morphisms. Each
edge e of Z defines an induced edge-piece RY (e) in a similar manner.
   We translate face immersions into linear algebra by counting the number of
times that each vertex-piece appears. This count naturally lives in the following
vector space.

Definition 4.5. The space of weight vectors R[P] is the real vector space of
formal linear sums                X
                              v=       vP P
                                       P ∈P

of vertex-pieces P ∈ P; the elements of this vector space are called weight
vectors. We will also talk about the additive subgroups Q[P] and Z[P] consisting
of rational and integral points respectively.
   There is a map that associates to the face immersion
                                     f0        f1
                                   Y →Z→X

from a visibly irreducible complex Y a weight vector:
                                       X
                              v(Y ) :=    PY (y) ,
                                          y∈VZ

recalling that VZ is the set of vertices of the 1-skeleton of Z. Clearly, v(Y ) has
non-negative integral coordinates, and, in fact, the possible weight vectors are
exactly the points with non-negative integral coordinates that satisfy a certain
system of linear equations, called the gluing equations. These gluing equations
make use of boundary maps, which associate to each vertex piece the induced
edge-pieces of the incident vertices. Let R[E] be the real vector space of formal
linear sums of edge pieces.
Definition 4.6. Recall from Definition 4.4 that, for any vertex piece

                               Y (P ) → Z(P ) → X

and any edge e of Z(P ), there is an induced edge piece RY (P ) (e).



                                          28
   The boundary map ∂ ι : R[P] → R[E] is defined by extending
                                    X
                         ∂ ι(P ) :=      RY (P ) (e)
                                           ι
                                        e∈EZ(P )


linearly. Similarly, the assignment
                                          X
                           ∂ τ(P ) :=              RY (P ) (e)
                                           τ
                                        e∈EZ(P )



extends linearly to define the boundary map ∂ τ : R[P] → R[E]. We then set

                                  ∂ := ∂ ι − ∂ τ .

A vector v ∈ R[P] is said to satisfy the gluing equations if ∂(v) = 0.
   The domain of the optimisation problem of interest to us is the cone of
non-negative vectors that satisfy the gluing equations. To this end, set
                              (                          )
                                X
                  R≥0 [P] :=        vP P vP ≥ 0 for all P .
                                P ∈P

We are interested in the cone

                            C(R) := ker ∂ ∩ R≥0 [P] ,

and also in the sets of integer points C(Z) := C(R) ∩ Z[P] and of rational points
C(Q) := C(R) ∩ Q[P]. The key fact here is that the map to weight vectors
surjects the integer points of C(R). It is also finite-to-one, although we will not
make use of that here.
Proposition 4.7. Let X be a finite 2-complex. If Y is a finite, visibly irreducible
complex, Z is also a complex and

                                  Y →Z→X

is a face immersion then v(Y ) ∈ C(Z). Conversely, if v ∈ C(Z) then there is a
face immersion from a finite visibly irreducible complex

                                  Y →Z→X

such that v = v(Y ).
Proof. Consider an edge piece R ∈ E over X. The R-coefficient of ∂ ι(v(Y ))
counts the number of vertices z of Z for which there is an edge e with ι(e) = z
such the induced edge piece RY (e) is isomorphic to R. Since Z is a complex,
such vertices z are in bijection with such edges e, and so this coordinate is equal
to the number of edges e of Z such that RY (e) is isomorphic to R: notice that
the latter quantity does not mention ι. Similarly, the R-coefficient of ∂ τ(v(Y ))


                                          29
also counts the number of such edges e, and so ∂ ι(v(Y )) = ∂ τ(v(Y )). Therefore,
v(Y ) ∈ C(Z) as claimed.
    To prove surjectivity, consider an integral weight vector v ∈ C(Z), and define
the pre-complexes
                                      a a  vP
                               Z ′ :=          Z(P )
                                       P ∈P iP =1

and
                                         vP
                                       a a
                              Y ′ :=                Y (P ) ,
                                       P ∈P iP =1

noting that these come naturally equipped with maps to define a face immersion

                                  Y ′ → Z′ → X

Furthermore, Y ′ is visibly irreducible by construction.
    The gluing equations imply that for each edge piece R there is a bijection
between the set of edges e ∈ EZι ′ such that RY ′ (e) = R and the set of e ∈ EZτ ′
such that RY ′ (e) = R. Therefore, we may choose a bijection F : EZι ′ → EZτ ′ such
that RY ′ (F (e)) = RY ′ (e). Inductively applying the gluing construction from
Definition 2.22, Z ′ can be glued up to a complex Z equipped with a branched
immersion Z → X and a branched map Y ′ → Z.
    It remains to explain how to glue up Y ′ to create complex Y . For an edge
e of Z, let P (ι(e)) denote the piece used to construct the vertex ι(e) of Z, and
let P (τ (e)) the piece used to construct the vertex τ (e) of Z. The pre-complexes
                                                                     −1
Y (P (ι(ϵ))) and Y (P (τ (ϵ))) each naturally induce partitions of wZ   (e), and by
construction, these two partitions are equal. Therefore, there is a bijection
G : EYι ′ → EYτ ′ that respects the map Y ′ → Z. Again, inductively applying
the gluing construction from Definition 2.22, Y ′ can be glued up to a com-
plex Y equipped with face-equivalence Y → Z. By construction, Y is visibly
irreducible.

4.3    Degree and curvature
The final ingredient is to notice that, given a face-essential map f : Y → X, the
total curvature and the degree are both realised by linear functions on C(R).
Definition 4.8. Let lX (C) denote the number of vertices in each component
C of SX . Recall that a vertex-piece P ∈ P consists of a face immersion

                              Y (P ) → Z(P ) → X .

In particular, each vertex x of SY (P ) is sent to some component Cx of SX . The
degree map deg : R[P] → R is now given by linearly extending the assignment
                                           X             1
                          deg(P ) :=                          .
                                                     lX (Cx )
                                        x∈VSY (P )



                                           30
    The point of this definition is to extend the definition of the degree of a
face-essential map.
Lemma 4.9. If
                                    Y →Z→X
is a face immersion for a face-essential map f : Y → X, then
                              deg(v(Y )) = deg(f ) .
Proof. For any component C of SY , lY (C) = degC (f )lX (f (C)). Therefore,
                                   X
                   deg(f ) =              degC (f )
                                    [C]∈π0 (SY )
                                       X             lY (C)
                               =
                                                   lX (f (C))
                                    [C]∈π0 (SY )
                                       X           X         1
                               =
                                                        lX (f (C))
                                    [C]∈π0 (SY ) x∈VC
                                     X     1
                               =
                                       lX (Cx )
                                 x∈VSY
                                 X X
                               =              deg(P )
                                    P ∈P PY (y)=P

                               =    deg(v(Y ))
as required.
   A similar observation applies to the total curvature.
Definition 4.10. For a vertex-piece P ∈ P, set
                     τ (P ) := deg(P ) + #VY (P ) − #EY (P ) /2
and extend this to a linear function τ : R[P] → R.
   Again, this extends the total curvature to a linear function on C(R).
Lemma 4.11. If
                                    Y →Z→X
is a face immersion for a face-essential map f : Y → X, then τ (v(Y )) = τ (Y ).
Proof. By definition, τ (Y ) = deg(f ) + χ(GY ), so it suffices to prove that
                              X
                  χ(GY ) =        (#VY (P (v)) − #EY (P (v)) /2) .
                             v∈VZ

Since VY (P (v)) bijects with the set of vertices of Y that map to v ∈ Z,
                               X
                                   #VY (P (v)) = #VY .
                             v∈VZ


                                         31
Likewise, EY (P (v)) bijects with the set of edges of Y incident at a vertex mapping
to v, so                      X
                                   #EY (P (v)) = 2#EY .
                              v∈VZ

Therefore,
             X
                    (#VY (P (v)) − #EY (P (v)) /2) = #VY − #EY = χ(GY )
             v∈VZ

as required.
   The following rationality theorem now follows by standard optimisation tech-
niques.
Theorem 4.12. Let X be a finite 2-complex. There is a finite, visibly irreducible
complex Ymax and a face-essential map fmax : Ymax → X such that
                                  τ (Ymax )    τ (Y )
                                            ≥
                                 deg(fmax )   deg(f )
for all face-essential maps f : Y → X with Y finite and visibly irreducible.
Proof. Consider the rational polyhedron

                              ∆ := C(R) ∩ {deg(v) = 1} .

Every coordinate vector in R[P] has positive degree, and so

                                R≥0 [P] ∩ {deg(v) = 1}

is a simplex. Hence, ∆ is compact.
    By the simplex algorithm, the linear map τ is maximised at some vertex
vmax of ∆. Since ∆ is rationally defined, vmax ∈ C(Q), and so has some multiple
umax ∈ C(Z). By Proposition 4.7, umax = v(Ymax ) for some face immersion

                                 Ymax → Zmax → X ,

with Ymax finite and visibly irreducible. In particular, by Lemma 2.21, the
morphism fmax : Ymax → X is face-essential.
   For any face-essential map f : Y → X, the factorisation through the folded
representative defines a face immersion

                                     Y → Ȳ → X

by Lemma 2.21, so v(Y )/ deg(f ) ∈ ∆ and

                             τ (Ymax )                τ (Y )
                                       = τ (vmax ) ≥
                            deg(fmax )               deg(f )
as required.


                                          32
    Combined with Corollary 3.23, we can complete the proof of Theorem C.
Proof of Theorem C. Let fmax : Ymax → X be the face-essential map provided
by Theorem 4.12, and set
                                    τ (Ymax )
                            ϵ := −            .
                                   deg(fmax )
Since X has negative immersions and Ymax is visibly irreducible, Corollary 3.23
applies to show that τ (Ymax ) < 0, whence ϵ > 0 as required.
    Suppose now that Y0 is a finite, irreducible complex and that f0 : Y0 → X is
an immersion; in particular, τ (Y0 ) = χ(Y0 ) and deg(f ) is the number of faces of
Y0 . By Lemma 3.4, Y0 unfolds to a finite, visibly irreducible 2-complex Y → Y0 ,
and the composition
                                              f0
                                f : Y → Y0 → X
is face-essential. Therefore,

                                           τ (Y )
                               −ϵ ≥
                                          deg(f )
                                           τ (Y0 )
                                     =
                                          deg(f0 )
                                                χ(Y0 )
                                     =
                                          #{2−cells of Y }

as required.


5     The case with torsion
We shall see that Theorem C leads to strong constraints on the subgroup struc-
ture of one-relator groups with negative immersions. As stated, it only applies
to one-relator groups without torsion. Baumslag’s coherence conjecture was
proved in the case with torsion independently by the authors [LW20] and Wise
[Wis20]. The purpose of this section is to note that one-relator groups with
torsion also fit into the framework of this paper.
    The presentation complex of a one-relator group with torsion also has uni-
form negative immersions, after passing to a finite-sheeted covering space3 .
Theorem 5.1. Consider a one-relator group with torsion G = F/⟨⟨un ⟩⟩, where
n > 1. There is a torsion-free subgroup G0 of finite index in G that is the
fundamental group of a finite 2-complex X0 with uniform negative immersions.
Proof. By [LW20, Theorem 2.2], there is a torsion-free subgroup G0 of G that
is the fundamental group of a complex X0 . As in the proof of [LW20, Theorem
2.2], X0 can be obtained from the presentation complex X of G by passing to
   3 Alternatively, one might work with a presentation orbi-complex, which itself has uniform

negative immersions for maps from complexes.




                                             33
a finite-sheeted cover and collapsing duplicate faces. By [LW20, Corollary 3.1],
any immersion Y ↬ X0 satisfies

                      χ(Y ) + (n − 1)#{2−cells of Y } ≤ 0

as long as Y is finite and irreducible. Rearranging, we obtain that
                             χ(Y )
                                          ≤ 1 − n < 0,
                         #{2−cells of Y }
so X0 has uniform negative immersions as claimed.


6     Uniform negative immersions and subgroups
In this section we complete the proof of Theorems A and B, by proving these
properties for the fundamental group of any complex X with uniform negative
immersions. Our strategy is similar to the proof of coherence for one-relator
groups with torsion [LW20, Wis20]. There is, however, a small extra technicality,
because we need to deal with irreducible 2-complexes, rather than non-visibly-
reducible 2-complexes; this extra technicality is resolved by Lemmas 3.10 and
3.14.
    Let G be a one-relator group with negative immersions, let X be its standard
presentation complex, and let H be a finitely generated subgroup of G. The
next lemma is the key consequence of uniform negative immersions that we
will make use of. Two immersions of 2-complexes Y1 → X and Y2 → X are
isomorphic if there is an isomorphism of 2-complexes Y1 → Y2 such that the
obvious diagram commutes.
Lemma 6.1. Let X be a finite 2-complex with uniform negative immersions.
For any integer r, there are only finitely many isomorphism classes of immer-
sions Y → X such that Y is finite, connected, irreducible, and b1 (Y ) ≤ r (where
b1 (Y ) denotes the first Betti number of Y ).
Proof. Consider such an immersion Y ↬ X. Rearranging the defining inequality
of uniform negative immersions, we have that
                                               −χ(Y )
                          #{2−cells of Y } ≤          .
                                                 ϵ
But
                           χ(Y ) ≥ 1 − b1 (Y ) ≥ 1 − r
since Y is a 2-complex, so #{2−cells of Y } ≤ (r − 1)/ϵ. Thus, there is a uniform
bound on the number of faces of Y . Because Y is irreducible, every vertex or
edge of Y is incident at a face. Since Y ↬ X is an immersion, there is a bound
on the number of faces at which each vertex and edge of Y are incident, so the
bound on the number of faces implies bounds on the numbers of vertices and
edges. Therefore, there are only finitely many possible combinatorial types for
Y , and also for immersions Y ↬ X.


                                       34
    Note that Lemma 6.1 fails for 2-complexes with non-positive immersions. For
instance, the torus has infinitely many non-isomorphic finite-sheeted covering
spaces, all with fundamental groups generated by 2 elements.
    Now consider a finitely generated subgroup H of G = π1 (X). By Grushko’s
theorem, we may assume that H is freely indecomposable. The next lemma is
very similar to [LW20, Lemma 4.2]; however, the reader should beware that the
definition of irreducible complex used here is more restrictive than the definition
in [LW20].
Lemma 6.2. Let X be a 2-complex, G = π1 (X), and H ≤ G a finitely gener-
ated, non-cyclic, freely indecomposable subgroup. After replacing H by a con-
jugate, there is a sequence of π1 -surjective immersions of compact, connected
2-complexes
                       Y0 ↬ Y1 ↬ Y2 ↬ · · · ↬ Yi ↬ · · · X
with the following properties:
 (i) each Yi is irreducible;
 (ii) H = −
          lim
           → π1 Yi .
    Because of the stronger notion of irreducibility used in this paper, the proof
of Lemma 6.2 requires one extra ingredient: the irreducible core of Lemma 3.10.
With this in hand, the proof of Lemma 6.2 is very similar to the proof of [LW20,
Lemma 4.3].
Proof of Lemma 6.2. [LW20, Lemma 4.3] (see also Remark 2.14) provides a
sequence of π1 -surjective immersions of 2–complexes
                                              fi+1
                                 Zi → Zi+1 → X

such that H = lim−→ π1 Zi . It remains to improve this to make the terms irre-
ducible.
   Since H is non-cyclic, no Zi has cyclic fundamental group. By Scott’s lemma
(proved with extra hypotheses as [Sco73, Lemma 2.2], proved as [Swa04, Theo-
rem 2.1]), since H is freely indecomposable, after throwing away finitely many
terms from the sequence we may assume that each π1 (Zi ) is freely indecompos-
able.
   Applying Lemmas 3.10 and 3.14 inductively constructs a second sequence
        Y0         Y1          Y2       ···          Yi      ···


        Z0         Z1          Z2       ···          Zi      ···        X

where each Yi is the irreducible core Zbi of Zi . Now choose a basepoint in Y0 , if
necessary moving the basepoints of the Zi — this may involve conjugating H.
The result now follows.



                                        35
    The next theorem, which is an easy consequence of Lemmas 6.1 and 6.2,
will imply Theorem A. Its proof is an elaboration of the arguments of [LW20]
or [Wis20].
Theorem 6.3. Let X be a finite 2-complex with uniform negative immersions,
and let G = π1 (X). For any finitely generated, non-cyclic, freely indecomposable
subgroup H of G, there is an immersion from a finite, irreducible 2-complex Y
to X such that π1 (Y ) ∼
                       = H and Y ↬ X induces the inclusion of H into G up
to conjugacy.
Proof. After possibly conjugating H, Lemma 6.2 provides a sequence of π1 -
surjective immersions of compact, connected, irreducible complexes

                      Y0 ↬ Y1 ↬ Y2 ↬ · · · ↬ Yi ↬ · · · X

such that H = −  → π1 Yi . Since the maps Yi → Yi+1 are surjective on fundamen-
                lim
tal groups, there is a uniform bound

                                b1 (Y0 ) ≥ b1 (Yi )

on the first Betti numbers. Therefore, by Lemma 6.1, infinitely many of the
immersions Yi ↬ X are isomorphic, so passing to a subsequence we may assume
that they are all equal to a fixed immersion Y ↬ X. By [Wis04, Lemma
6.3], each immersion Yi ↬ Yi+1 is an isomorphism. In particular, since H =
−→ π1 (Yi ), every Y → X represents H, as required.
lim

   Coherence is an immediate consequence.
Corollary 6.4. If X is a finite 2-complex with uniformly negative immersions
then π1 (X) is coherent.
Proof. Let H be a finitely generated subgroup of G. By Grushko’s theorem, H
can be written as a free product

                              H = F ∗ H1 . . . ∗ Hn

where F is free and each Hi is freely indecomposable. Each factor Hi is finitely
presented by Theorem 6.3, so the result follows.

   Theorem A now follows quickly.
Proof of Theorem A. The theorem follows by combining Theorems 1.2 and C
with Corollary 6.4.
   Likewise, the conclusions of Theorem B also hold for all complexes with
uniform negative immersions.
Theorem 6.5. Let X be a finite 2-complex with uniform negative immersions,
and let G = π1 (X).



                                        36
 (i) Every finitely generated one-ended subgroup H of G is co-Hopfian, i.e. H
     is not isomorphic to a proper subgroup of itself. In particular, G itself is
     co-Hopfian.
 (ii) For any integer r, there are only finitely many conjugacy classes of finitely
      generated one-ended subgroups H of G such that the abelianisation of H
      has rational rank at most r.
(iii) Every finitely generated non-cyclic subgroup H of G is large in the sense
      of Pride, i.e. there is a subgroup H0 of finite index in H that surjects a
      non-abelian free group.
Proof. Let H be a non-cyclic, finitely generated subgroup of G.
    To prove item (i), assume that H is freely indecomposable, so is realised
up to conjugacy by an immersion Y = Y0 ↬ X, by Theorem 6.3. Given any
injective homomorphism H → H, applying Theorem 6.3 inductively gives rise
to a sequence of immersions of finite, connected, irreducible complexes
                        . . . ↬ Yi ↬ . . . ↬ Y1 ↬ Y0 ↬ X ,
where π1 (Yi ) ∼
               = H for all i. By Lemma 6.1, there are finitely many isomorphism
classes of complexes Yi so, passing to a subsequence, we may assume that Yi = Y
for some fixed Y and all n. Since Y is compact, every immersion Y ↬ Y is
an isomorphism [Wis04, Lemma 6.3], so the homomorphism H → H is also
surjective, as required.
    Item (ii) is an immediate consequence of Theorem 6.3 and Lemma 6.1.
    Finally, to prove item (iii), start by assuming that H is freely indecompos-
able. By Theorem 6.3, up to conjugacy, the inclusion of H into G is induced by
an immersion Y ↬ X, where Y is a finite, connected, irreducible 2-complex. By
negative immersions, χ(Y ) ≤ −1. A choice of maximal tree in the 1-skeleton
of Y leads to a presentation for H with m generators and n relators, where
χ(Y ) = 1 − m + n, so the deficiency of this presentation is
                             m − n = 1 − χ(Y ) ≥ 2 .
Therefore, by the Baumslag–Pride theorem [BP78], H is large, as required. For
general H, consider the Grushko decomposition
                             H = F ∗ H1 ∗ . . . ∗ Hk
where F is free and each Hi is non-cyclic and freely indecomposable. Since the
factors Hi are all large, it follows that H is large unless H is cyclic.
   Theorem B follows immediately from Theorems C and 6.5.
   We close by noting that Lemma 6.1 above can be made somewhat effective.
Proposition 6.6. Let X be the presentation complex of a one-relator group
G = F/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ with negative immersions. There is an algorithm that takes w as
input and outputs a constant C = C(w) such that every one-ended subgroup
generated H of G with abelianisation of rational rank at most r is represented
by an immersion Y ↬ X with at most C(r − 1) 2-cells.


                                        37
Proof. Theorem C asserts that X has uniform negative immersions, meaning
that there is an ϵ > 0 such that
                                 χ(Y )
                                              ≤ −ϵ ,
                             #{2−cells of Y }

for every irreducible Y immersing into X. The constant ϵ is an extremal value
of the linear-programming problem used in the proof of Theorem 4.12. This
linear-programming problem is explicitly defined in terms of X, so ϵ can be
computed from the data of X. The proof of Lemma 6.1 now shows that the
number of 2-cells of Y is at most (r − 1)/ϵ, so we may take C = 1/ϵ.
    Note that Proposition 6.6 does not immediately imply that there is an algo-
rithm to compute presentations for finitely generated subgroups of one-relator
groups. In [GW09], a coherent group in which there is an algorithm to compute
a finite presentation for a given finitely generated subgroup is called effectively
coherent. The following question remains open.
Question 6.7. Are one-relator groups with negative immersions effectively co-
herent?


References
[AO96]     G. N. Arzhantseva and A. Yu. Ol’shanskiı̆, Generality of the class
           of groups in which subgroups with a lesser number of generators are
           free, Mat. Zametki 59 (1996), no. 4, 489–496, 638. MR 1445193
[Bau69]    Gilbert Baumslag, A non-cyclic one-relator group all of whose finite
           quotients are cyclic, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 10 (1969), 497–498.
[Bau74]    Gilbert Baumslag, Some problems on one-relator groups, Proceed-
           ings of the Second International Conference on the Theory of Groups
           (Australian Nat. Univ., Canberra, 1973) (Berlin), Lecture Notes in
           Math., vol. 372, Springer, 1974, pp. 75—-81.

[BP78]     Benjamin Baumslag and Stephen J. Pride, Groups with two more
           generators than relators, Journal of the London Mathematical Soci-
           ety. Second Series 17 (1978), no. 3, 425–426.
[Cal08]    Danny Calegari, Surface subgroups from homology, Geometry &
           Topology 12 (2008), no. 4, 1995–2007.
[Cal09a]          , scl, MSJ Memoirs, no. 20, Mathematical Society of Japan,
           Tokyo, 2009.
[Cal09b]         , Stable commutator length is rational in free groups, Jour.
           Amer. Math. Soc. 22 (2009), no. 4, 941–961.

[Cas23]    Christopher H. Cashen, Personal communication, 2023.


                                        38
[CHar]    Christopher H. Cashen and Charlotte Hoffmann, Short, highly im-
          primitive words yield hyperbolic one-relator groups, Experimental
          Mathematics, to appear.
[CM11]    Christopher H. Cashen and Nataša Macura, Line patterns in free
          groups, Geom. Topol. 15 (2011), no. 3, 1419–1475. MR 2825316

[Cul81]   Marc Culler, Using surfaces to solve equations in free groups, Topol-
          ogy 20 (1981), no. 2, 133–145.
[Del95]   T. Delzant, L’image d’un groupe dans un groupe hyperbolique, Com-
          ment. Math. Helv. 70 (1995), no. 2, 267–284. MR 1324630

[DH91]    Andrew J. Duncan and James Howie, The genus problem for one-
          relator products of locally indicable groups, Math. Z. 208 (1991),
          no. 2, 225–237.
[Gro87]   M. Gromov, Hyperbolic groups, Essays in group theory, Math. Sci.
          Res. Inst. Publ., vol. 8, Springer, New York, 1987, pp. 75–263.

[GW09]    Daniel Groves and Henry Wilton, Enumerating limit groups, Groups,
          Geometry and Dynamics 3 (2009), no. 3, 389—399.
[GW19]    Giles Gardam and Daniel J. Woodhouse, The geometry of one-relator
          groups satisfying a polynomial isoperimetric inequality, Proc. Amer.
          Math. Soc. 147 (2019), no. 1, 125–129. MR 3876736
[Heu19]   Nicolaus Heuer, Constructions in stable commutator length and
          bounded cohomology, Ph.D. thesis, University of Oxford, 2019.
[HL22]    Nicolaus Heuer and Clara Löh, Simplicial volume of one-relator
          groups and stable commutator length, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 22
          (2022), no. 4, 1615–1661. MR 4495666
[HP20]    Liam Hanany and Doron Puder, Word measures on symmetric
          groups, Sém. Lothar. Combin. 84B (2020), Art. 79, 12. MR 4138706
[HW16]    Joseph Helfer and Daniel T. Wise, Counting cycles in labeled graphs:
          the nonpositive immersion property for one-relator groups, Int. Math.
          Res. Not. IMRN (2016), no. 9, 2813–2827.
[IMM23] Giovanni Italiano, Bruno Martelli, and Matteo Migliorini, Hyperbolic
        5-manifolds that fiber over S 1 , Invent. Math. 231 (2023), no. 1, 1–38.
        MR 4526820

[Jr49]    Marshall Hall Jr, Subgroups of finite index in free groups, Canadian
          Journal of Mathematics 1 (1949), 187–190.
[Kap22]   Ilya Kapovich, Primitivity rank for random elements in free groups,
          J. Group Theory 25 (2022), no. 5, 823–835. MR 4472898


                                      39
[Lin22]   Marco Linton, One-relator hierarchies, arXiv:2202.11324, 2022.
[LW17]    Larsen Louder and Henry Wilton, Stackings and the W -cycles Con-
          jecture, Canad. Math. Bull. 60 (2017), no. 3, 604–612.
[LW20]           , One-relator groups with torsion are coherent, Math. Res.
          Lett. 27 (2020), no. 5, 1499–1512. MR 4216595
[LW22]          , Negative immersions for one-relator groups, Duke Math. J.
          171 (2022), no. 3, 547–594. MR 4382976
[Man10]   Jason Fox Manning, Virtually geometric words and Whitehead’s al-
          gorithm, Math. Res. Lett. 17 (2010), no. 5, 917–925.

[MPW13] Eduardo Martı́nez-Pedroza and Daniel T. Wise, Coherence and neg-
        ative sectional curvature in complexes of groups, Michigan Math. J.
        62 (2013), no. 3, 507–536. MR 3102528
[Pud14]   Doron Puder, Primitive words, free factors and measure preservation,
          Israel J. Math. 201 (2014), no. 1, 25–73.
[Pud15]          , Expansion of random graphs: new proofs, new results, In-
          vent. Math. 201 (2015), no. 3, 845–908. MR 3385636
[RS94]    E. Rips and Z. Sela, Structure and rigidity in hyperbolic groups. I,
          Geometric and Functional Analysis 4 (1994), no. 3, 337–371.

[Sco73]   G. P. Scott, Finitely generated 3-manifold groups are finitely pre-
          sented, Journal of the London Mathematical Society. Second Series
          6 (1973), 437–440.
[Sel97]   Z. Sela, Structure and rigidity in (Gromov) hyperbolic groups and
          discrete groups in rank 1 Lie groups. II, Geom. Funct. Anal. 7 (1997),
          no. 3, 561–593. MR 1466338
[Sta83]   John R. Stallings, Topology of finite graphs, Invent. Math. 71 (1983),
          no. 3, 551–565.
[Sv11]    Mark Sapir and Iva Špakulová, Almost all one-relator groups with at
          least three generators are residually finite, J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS)
          13 (2011), no. 2, 331–343. MR 2746769
[Swa04]   Gadde A. Swarup, Delzant’s variation on Scott complexity,
          arXiv:math/0401308, 2004.
[Whi36]   J. H. C. Whitehead, On equivalent sets of elements in a free group,
          Ann. of Math. (2) 37 (1936), no. 4, 782–800. MR 1503309
[Wil18]   Henry Wilton, Essential surfaces in graph pairs, J. Amer. Math. Soc.
          31 (2018), no. 4, 893–919. MR 3836561



                                      40
[Wil22]   Henry Wilton, Rational curvature invariants for 2-complexes,
          arXiv:2210.09853, 2022.
[Wis03]   Daniel T. Wise, Coherence, local-indicability and non-positive im-
          mersions, Preprint, http://www.gidon.com/dani/tl.cgi?athe=
          pspapers/NonPositiveCoherence.ps, 2003.

[Wis04]   Daniel T. Wise, Sectional curvature, compact cores, and local quasi-
          convexity, Geom. Funct. Anal. 14 (2004), no. 2, 433–468. MR 2062762
[Wis08]         , Nonpositive sectional curvature for (p, q, r)-complexes, Proc.
          Amer. Math. Soc. 136 (2008), no. 1, 41–48. MR 2350386

[Wis20]   Daniel T. Wise, Coherence, local-indicability and nonpositive immer-
          sions, J. Inst. Math. Jussieu First view (2020), 1–16.


   L. Louder, Department of Mathematics, University College London, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, UK
   E-mail address: l.louder@ucl.ac.uk
    H. Wilton, DPMMS, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Wilberforce Road, Cam-
bridge CB3 0WB, UK
    E-mail address: h.wilton@maths.cam.ac.uk




                                      41
