Logan, A. D. (2016) The JSJ-decompositions of one-relator groups with
torsion. Geometriae Dedicata, 180(1), pp. 171-185.(doi:10.1007/s10711-
015-0097-1)

This is the author’s final accepted version.

There may be differences between this version and the published version.
You are advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from
it.


 http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/121498/




 Deposited on: 28 July 2016




     Enlighten – Research publications by members of the University of Glasgow
                               http://eprints.gla.ac.uk33640
    THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR
             GROUPS WITH TORSION

                              ALAN D. LOGAN




       Abstract. In this paper we use JSJ-decompositions to formalise
       a folk conjecture recorded by Pride on the structure of one-relator
       groups with torsion. We prove a slightly weaker version of the
       conjecture, which implies that the structure of one-relator groups
       with torsion closely resemble the structure of torsion-free hyper-
       bolic groups.


                             1. Introduction
   A classical result of Karrass, Magnus and Solitar states that if a
word R over an alphabet X ±1 is not a proper power of any other word
over X ±1 then a group G with a presentation of the form G = hX; Rn i
has torsion if and only if n > 1; moreover, the word R has order pre-
cisely n [KMS60] (see also their book [MKS04, Corollary 4.11 & The-
orem 4.12]). Such a group G is called a one-relator group with torsion
if we further stipulate that |X| > 1.
   In this paper we study the structure of one-relator groups with tor-
sion which do not admit a free group as a free factor; this is precisely
the class of finitely-generated, one-ended one-relator groups with tor-
sion [FKS72].

One-relator groups. One-relator groups are classically studied (see,
for example, the classic texts in combinatorial group theory [MKS04]
[LS77] or the early work of Magnus [Mag30] [Mag32]), and these groups
continue to have applications to this day, for example in 3-dimensional

   Date: July 28, 2016.
   2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20E99, 20F65, 20F67.
   Key words and phrases. One relator groups with torsion, JSJ-decompositions,
Hyperbolic groups.
   The author would like to thank his PhD supervisor, Stephen J. Pride, and Tara
Brendle for many helpful discussions about this paper, and Jim Howie for sugges-
tions regarding a preprint. He would also like to thank an anonymous referee of
another paper [Log16] for the suggestion to apply the ideas of Kapovich–Weidmann
to prove Theorem 6.2, which led to this paper.
                                       1
2                             A.D.LOGAN

topology and knot theory [IT15] [FT15]. One-relator groups with tor-
sion are hyperbolic and as such they serve as important test cases for
this larger class of groups. For example, the isomorphism problem for
two-generator, one-relator groups with torsion was shown to be solu-
ble [Pri77a] long before Dahmani–Guirardel’s recent resolution of the
isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic groups [DG11]. As another ex-
ample, Wise recently resolved the classical conjecture of G. Baumslag
that all one-relator groups with torsion are residually finite [Wis12],
while it is still an open question as to whether all hyperbolic groups
are residually finite.

Main results. Pride has recorded the following folk conjecture [Pri77b].
Folk Conjecture. Apart from the complications introduced by having
elements of finite order, one-relator groups with torsion behave much
like free groups.
   Using JSJ-decompositions, we can make this conjecture concrete
as follows. One-relator groups with torsion are hyperbolic, and JSJ-
decompositions are important structural invariants of hyperbolic groups.
The JSJ-decomposition of a hyperbolic group is a canonical splitting of
the group as a graph of groups where every edge group is virtually-Z.
For a given hyperbolic group H, JSJ-decompositions can be used to
determine the model theory [Sel09] and the isomorphism class [DG11]
of H, and to coarsely determine the outer automorphism group [Lev05]
of H.
Folk Conjecture (JSJ-version). Let G be a one-relator group with
torsion which does not admit a free group as a free factor. Then pre-
cisely one vertex group of the JSJ-decomposition of G contains torsion;
all other vertex groups are free groups.
  The main result of this paper, Theorem A, proves a slightly weaker
version of the above conjecture. We state an abbreviated version of
Theorem A below. The complete statement, along with the proof, can
be found in Section 5.
Theorem A. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a one-relator group with
torsion which does not admit a free group as a free factor. Then pre-
cisely one non-elementary vertex group of the JSJ-decomposition of G
contains torsion; all other non-elementary vertex groups are torsion-
free hyperbolic groups. In general, an edge group is a subgroup of mal-
normal infinite cyclic subgroup of G.
  Theorem A implies that, in the sense of Dahmani–Guirardel [DG11],
the Z-max JSJ-decomposition of a one-ended one-relator group with
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION 3

torsion G = hX; Rn i is precisely the JSJ-decomposition of the group G.
Dahmani–Guirardel’s notion of a Z-max JSJ-decomposition is funda-
mental to their resolution to the isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic
groups.
   In this paper we give examples of one-relator groups with torsion
which have non-trivial JSJ-decomposition; in each case the torsion-free
vertex groups are free, and the vertex group containing torsion is a one-
relator group with torsion. These examples imply that the statement
of Theorem A is not vacuous.

Theorem A and the Folk Conjecture. Theorem A implies that
the JSJ-decompositions of one-ended one-relator groups with torsion
have a structure similar to that of torsion-free hyperbolic groups. This
is a weak version of the folk conjecture stated above.
   The statement in Theorem A relating to edge groups is not part of the
JSJ-version of the folk conjecture. In Section 5.1 we state and prove
Theorem B, which is Theorem A but without the statement about
edge groups. Theorem B is of interest because it has a short proof.
Note, however, that the statement about edge groups again mimics the
torsion-free hyperbolic groups case, in the sense that in torsion-free
hyperbolic groups all edge groups are subgroups of malnormal, infinite
cyclic subgroups.
   In order to prove the analogous result to Theorem A for free groups
rather than torsion-free hyperbolic groups it would be sufficient to pro-
vide a positive answer to the following question.

Question 1. Is every torsion-free vertex group in the JSJ-decomposition
of a one-ended one-relator group with torsion a free group?

   A positive answer to Question 1 does not completely answer the JSJ-
version of the folk conjecture stated above. This is because Theorem A
leaves the possibility that a one-relator group with torsion could split
as G ∼= A ∗C B where B 6= C and both B and C are infinite dihe-
dral. A positive answer to Question 1 and a negative answer to the
following question, Question 2, would prove the JSJ-version of the folk
conjecture.

Question 2. Does there exist a one-ended one-relator group with tor-
sion which splits non-trivially as A ∗C B with B and C both infinite
dihedral?

  Question 2 is the least important of the questions stated here. This is
because its relevance to the conjecture depends on the precise definition
4                               A.D.LOGAN

of “JSJ-decomposition” we are working with. We discuss this relevance
at the end of Section 5.
   A positive answer to the following question would make the folk
conjecture much stronger.
Question 3. Is the unique non-elementary vertex group containing
torsion in the JSJ-decomposition of a one-ended one-relator group with
torsion itself a one-relator group with torsion?
   We do not know if these questions admit positive answers or not.
Note that B.B.Newman provided a possible counter-example to the folk
conjecture which motivates this paper [Pri77b], and one can interpret
Newman’s construction as a possible counter-example to Question 1.
However, in Example 7.1 from Section 7 we prove that Newman’s group
is not a counter-example to Question 1, and so not a counter-example
to the JSJ-version of the folk conjecture.

Overview of the paper. In Section 2 we motivate and define JSJ-
decompositions of hyperbolic groups. In Section 3 we prove a key
preliminary result, Lemma 3.2, that relates the number of ends of a
one-relator group with torsion hX; Rn i to the number of ends of the
associated torsion-free one-relator group hX; Ri. In Section 4 we re-
call certain fundamental results on the subgroups of one-relator groups
with torsion. In Section 5 we use the results of Sections 3 and 4, as
well as standard results on amalgams and HNN-extensions, to clas-
sify how a one-ended one-relator group can split as an HNN-extension
(Lemma 5.1) or amalgam (Lemma 5.5) over a virtually-Z subgroup.
These two lemmas combine to prove the Principal Lemma, Lemma 5.6,
which yields Theorem A. In Section 6 we outline two results on the
structure of two-generator, one-relator groups with torsion. These are
Theorem 6.1, which describes explicitly the possible JSJ-decompositions
of such a group, and Theorem 6.2, which proves that such a group is ei-
ther of the form ha, b; [a, b]n i or has virtually-cyclic outer automorphism
group. In Section 7 we give examples of one-relator groups with torsion
which have non-trivial JSJ-decomposition. These examples imply that
the results of this paper are not vacuous.
      2. JSJ-decompositions: motivation and definition
   JSJ-decompositions are important structural invariants of hyperbolic
groups. One-relator groups with torsion are hyperbolic [LS77, Theo-
rem IV.5.5], and this paper studies the JSJ-decompositions of one-
relator groups with torsion. Therefore, in this section we motivate and
give the definition of the JSJ-decomposition of a one-ended hyperbolic
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION 5

group. JSJ-decompositions encode the virtually-Z splittings of hyper-
bolic groups, so in Section 5 we investigate the virtually-Z splittings of
one-ended one-relator groups with torsion, and this analysis yields the
main result of this paper, Theorem A.
   Note that the definition of a “one-ended hyperbolic group” is not
necessary to understand this paper, because a one-relator group with
torsion is one-ended if and only if it does not admit a free group as a
free factor [FKS72]. This observation also means that our restriction to
the one-ended case does not weaken our solution to the folk-conjecture
which motives this paper.
   JSJ-decompositions are a certain kind of graph of groups splitting.
We use Γ to denote a graph of groups, with a connected underlying
graph Γ, associated vertex groups (or vertex stabilisers) {Gv ; v ∈ VΓ }
and edge groups (or edge stabilisers) {Ge ; e ∈ EΓ , Ge = Ge }, and set of
monomorphisms θe : Ge → Gι(e) [SS03].

Background on JSJ-decompositions. We now motivate the study
of, and loosely define, JSJ-decompositions of hyperbolic groups. A
more careful definition, due to Bowditch [Bow98], then follows.
   Mirroring the JSJ-decomposition of 3-manifolds [Hat00], the JSJ-
decomposition of a one-ended hyperbolic group is a graph of groups
decomposition where all edge groups are virtually-Z, and is (in an ap-
propriate sense) unique if certain vertices, called “orbifold vertices”, are
treated as pieces to be left intact and not decomposed [Bow98]. Sela
used these JSJ-decompositions to obtain results regarding the outer
automorphism groups of torsion-free hyperbolic groups [RS97], regard-
ing the isomorphism problem for torsion-free hyperbolic groups [Sel95],
and regarding the model theory of all hyperbolic groups [Sel09]. Levitt
used JSJ-decompositions to coarsely classify the outer automorphism
groups of hyperbolic groups [Lev05].
   Dahmani–Guirardel defined and used Z-max JSJ-decompositions, a
modification of JSJ-decompositions where edge groups are virtually-Z
with infinite center, to resolve the isomorphism problem for all hyper-
bolic groups [DG11]. The main result of our paper, Theorem A, implies
that the Z-max JSJ-decomposition of a one-ended one-relator group
with torsion G is simply the JSJ-decomposition of G.

The definition of JSJ-decompositions. We shall now define the
canonical JSJ-decomposition of a hyperbolic group. First, however, we
define certain terms used in the definition. An elementary subgroup of
a hyperbolic group is a virtually-Z subgroup. A refinement of a graph
of groups is a splitting Γv of a vertex group Gv over a subgroup C ≤ Gv
6                                   A.D.LOGAN

which respects the graph of groups structure [RS97], in the sense that
images of adjacent edge groups in Gv are vertex groups in the splitting
Γv ; if such a splitting exists then we say that Gv can be refined over
C.
   Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group which is not a Fuchsian
group. Then a JSJ-decomposition of G is a splitting of G as a graph
of groups Γ with three types of vertices.
     (1) Elementary vertices, whose group is a maximal elementary sub-
         group.
     (2) Orbifold vertices, whose group is a “maximal hanging Fuchsian
         subgroup”.1
     (3) Rigid vertices, whose group cannot be refined over an elemen-
         tary subgroup.
Every edge connects an elementary vertex to either a rigid or an orbifold
vertex. Edge groups of orbifold vertices correspond to the peripheral
subgroups of the hanging Fuchsian group. Finally, edge groups are
maximal elementary in the corresponding rigid or orbifold vertex group.
  A JSJ-decomposition of a hyperbolic group is unique up to conju-
gacy2 [Bow98] and so we can talk about the JSJ-decomposition of a
hyperbolic group.

                 3. The ends of one relator groups
   In this section we prove Lemma 3.2, which relates the number of ends
of a one-relator group with torsion G = hX; Rn i to the structure of the
related one-relator group without torsion Gb = hX; Ri. Lemma 3.2 is
a key technical result in this paper and is applied in Lemma 5.1 and
Lemma 5.5 from Section 5, which are the two cases of the Principal
Lemma, Lemma 5.6.

The group G.  b Suppose G is an arbitrary group. We define the
group Gb as the quotient of G by the normal closure T of the torsion
elements, that is, G
                   b := G/T . The following proposition is due to
Karrass, Magnus and Solitar [KMS60]. Recall that R denotes a word
which is not a proper power of any other word over X ±1 .

    1We only need orbifold vertices to define JSJ-decompositions; they are not men-
tioned anywhere else in this paper. Therefore, the interested reader is referred to
Bowditch [Bow98] for a formal definition.
   2The precise equivalence relation can be found in Bowditch’s paper [Bow98,
Section 6].
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION 7

Proposition 3.1. In a one relator group with torsion G = hX; Rn i the
      b has presentation hX; Ri and is torsion free.
group G
   Lemma 3.2 relates the ends of G = hX; Rn i, n > 1, to the structure
             b = hX; Ri.
of the group G

The ends of one-relator groups with torsion. A finitely-generated
infinite group can have one, two or infinitely many ends, and the class
of two-ended groups is precisely the class of virtually-Z groups. In this
section we use the fact that a finitely-generated one-relator group with
torsion has one end if and only if it does not admit a free group as a
free factor, and has infinitely many ends otherwise [FKS72]. We also
use the fact that a finitely-generated torsion-free group G is infinitely
ended if and only if it decomposes non-trivially as a free product, so
G = H ∗ K where H and K are both non-trivial [Sta68].
   Lemma 3.2 generalises the following observation: a two-generator,
one-relator group with torsion G = ha, b; Rn i is infinitely ended if and
only if the relator R is contained in some free basis of F (a, b), and G
is one-ended otherwise [Pri77a]. Our generalisation uses the natural
surjection from G = hX; Rn i, n > 1, to G     b = hX; Ri. The kernel
of this map is the normal closure of the element R, T = hhRii, by
Proposition 3.1. This subgroup T = hhRii plays an important role in
Section 5, where we prove the main results of this paper.
   In the proof of Lemma 3.2 we use the term “group with a single
defining relation” to mean a group with a presentation of the form
hX; Si where |X| ≥ 1, as opposed to |X| > 1.
Lemma 3.2. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a finitely-generated one-
relator group with torsion. Then G is infinitely ended if and only if G b
is either infinitely ended or infinite cyclic. Otherwise both G and G are
                                                                    b
one-ended.
Proof. Let G = hx1 , x2 , . . . , xm ; Rn i be a one-relator group with torsion
and without loss of generality we can assume that Rn has minimal
length in its Aut(Fm ) orbit.
   Now, G and G b are infinite (as we assume m > 1), so G has either
one-end or is a free product of a non-trivial free group and an inde-
composable group with a single defining relation [FKS72].
   Suppose G is a free product of a nontrivial free group and an in-
decomposable group with a single defining relation. Then, relabeling
the generators if necessary, there exists some 1 ≤ k < m such that
G∼ = G1 ∗ G2 where G1 = hx1 , . . . , xk ; Rn i is freely indecomposable and
G2 is free with basis xk+1 , . . . , xm [LS77, Proposition II.5.13]. Thus,
8                                 A.D.LOGAN

Gb=G     b1 ∗ G2 . If G  b1 is non-trivial then Gb is infinitely ended. If Gb1 is
trivial then G is free, and so is either infinite cyclic or has infinitely
                   b
many ends, as required.
   In order to prove the lemma, it is now sufficient to prove that if G      b is
infinitely ended or infinite cyclic then G is infinitely ended. So, firstly
suppose that G = hx1 , x2 , . . . , xm ; Rn i, n > 1, is one-ended but G     b is
infinitely ended. As G       b is a one-relator group (note that it is possibly
isomorphic to a free group) it can be decomposed as G1 ∗ G2 where
G1 = hx1 , . . . , xk ; Ri is a freely indecomposable group (possible trivial)
with a single defining relation, and where G2 is free. Because Rn has
minimal length in its Aut(Fm ) orbit, so has R. We can then apply the
fact that G is one-ended to get that G2 is trivial, and so G          b = G1 is
freely indecomposable. As G is torsion-free and freely indecomposable
                                   b
it is not infinitely ended, a contradiction. Secondly, suppose that G =
hx1 , . . . , xm ; Rn i, n > 1, is one-ended but G  b is two-ended, and again
R has minimal length in its Aut(Fm ) orbit. Then G             b is free of rank
one, because the only two-ended torsion-free group is the infinite cyclic
group. Therefore, R is primitive [LS77, Proposition II.5.10]. As R has
minimal length in Aut(Fm ), G has presentation hx1 , . . . , xm ; xn1 i and so
cannot be one-ended, a contradiction.                                          


            4. The subgroups of one relator groups
   The purpose of this section is to state certain known results on the
subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion which we apply in Sec-
tion 5. We also prove Lemma 4.4, which shows that, apart from
the complications introduced by having elements of finite order, the
virtually-Z subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion behave much
like those of torsion-free hyperbolic groups (equivalently, of free groups).
JSJ-decompositions encode the possible virtually-Z splittings of a hy-
perbolic group, and thus Lemma 4.4 is a key technical result in this
paper. We apply Lemma 4.4 in Lemmas 5.1 and 5.5 from Section 5,
which are the two cases of the Principal Lemma, Lemma 5.6.
   We begin by stating three known results, Propositions 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3,
on the subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion. These results are
used throughout Section 5, while Proposition 4.3 is also used in the
proof of Lemma 4.4.

The subgroup T . Let G = hX; Rn i be a one-relator group with
torsion. The first result we state relates to the structure of the subgroup
T := hhRii, as introduced in Section 3. This subgroup T plays an
 THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION 9

important role in Section 5. The result is due to Fischer, Karrass and
Solitar [FKS72].
Proposition 4.1 (Fischer–Karrass–Solitar, 1972). Assume that G =
hX; Rn i is a one-relator group with torsion. Then the subgroup T :=
hhRii is isomorphic to the free product of infinitely many cyclic groups
of order n.
  The second result we state implies that the finite cyclic free factors
of T are conjugate in G, although clearly they are not conjugate in
the abstract group T . This conjugate/non-conjugate duality is applied
in Lemmas 5.3 and 5.4 from Section 5. These two lemmas combine
to prove Lemma 5.5, which is one of the two cases of the Principal
Lemma. The result is due to Karrass, Magnus and Solitar [KMS60].
Proposition 4.2 (Karrass–Magnus–Solitar, 1960). Assume that G =
hX; Rn i is a one-relator group with torsion. If g ∈ G is an element of
finite order in G then g is conjugate to some power of the element R,
so h−1 gh = Ri .

Virtually-Z subgroups. The third result we state classifies the iso-
morphism classes of the virtually-Z subgroups of a one-relator group
with torsion. The result is due independently to Karrass and Soli-
tar [KS71], and to Cebotar [Ceb71].
Proposition 4.3 (Karrass–Solitar, Cebotar, 1971). If C is a virtually-
Z subgroup of a one-relator group with torsion then C is either infinite
cyclic or infinite dihedral.
  We now prove Lemma 4.4, which is a key technical result of this
paper. The result classifies, using malnormality, those virtually-Z sub-
groups which are not contained in any infinite dihedral subgroup of G.
We will take hg to mean conjugation by g, hg := g −1 hg. A subgroup
M of a group G is said to be malnormal in G if M g ∩ M 6= 1 implies
that g ∈ M .
Lemma 4.4. Assume that C is a virtually-Z subgroup of a one-relator
group with torsion G. Suppose that C is not a subgroup of an infinite
dihedral group. Then C is a subgroup of a malnormal, infinite cyclic
subgroup of G.
Proof. As G is hyperbolic every infinite cyclic subgroup of G is con-
tained in a unique maximal virtually-Z subgroup [Bow98]. Moreover,
in a hyperbolic group a maximal virtually-Z subgroup of G which is
torsion free is malnormal in G. The result then follows from Proposi-
tion 4.3.                                                          
10                             A.D.LOGAN

      5. The JSJ-decompositions of one relator groups
   The results of this section show that, apart from the complica-
tions introduced by having elements of finite order, the possible JSJ-
decompositions of one-ended one-relator groups with torsion are much
like those of one-ended torsion-free hyperbolic groups.
   More formally, in the Principal Lemma, Lemma 5.6, we prove that,
apart from possibly certain specific cases, every edge group of the JSJ-
decomposition of a one-ended one-relator group with torsion G is a
subgroup of a malnormal infinite-cyclic group (this is precisely what
happens in torsion-free hyperbolic groups). From this, Theorem A
follows quickly.
Theorem A. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a one-ended one-relator
group with torsion. Then precisely one non-elementary vertex group of
the JSJ-decomposition of G contains torsion; all other non-elementary
vertex groups are torsion-free hyperbolic groups. If v is an elementary
vertex in the JSJ-decomposition of G then one of the following occurs.
     (1) The vertex v has arbitrary degree, and the vertex group Gv is a
         subgroup of a malnormal, infinite cyclic subgroup of G.
     (2) The vertex v has degree one, and both the vertex group Gv and
         the adjacent edge group Ge are infinite dihedral.


Proving the Principal Lemma. Theorem A follows quickly from the
Principal Lemma, Lemma 5.6, and the proof of the Principal Lemma
takes up the majority of this section, Section 5. The issue that the
lemma resolves is that, by Proposition 4.3, the edge groups in the JSJ-
decomposition may be infinite dihedral. In order to prove the Principal
Lemma we prove that if a one-ended, one-relator group with torsion
G = hX; Rn i splits as an amalgam or HNN-extension over a virtually-
Z subgroup C with non-virtually-Z edge group(s) then, in general, C
cannot be contained in the normal closure T := hhRii of the element
R, and so, by Lemma 4.4, C is contained in a malnormal, infinite cyclic
subgroup of G. Lemma 5.1 proves the result for HNN-extensions while
Lemma 5.5 proves it for free products with amalgamation.

5.1. No even torsion. A weakened form of Theorem A admits a quick
proof for one-ended one-relator groups with torsion which contain no
even torsion. We state and prove this result, Theorem B, here. Note
that Theorem B is only of interest because it admits a short proof:
Theorem A is a stronger result which holds for these groups.
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION11

Theorem B. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a one-ended one-relator
group with torsion, and suppose n is odd. Then precisely one non-
elementary vertex group of the JSJ-decomposition of G contains tor-
sion; all other non-elementary vertex groups are torsion-free hyperbolic
groups.
Proof. Every edge group of the JSJ-decomposition of such a group G
is infinite-cyclic, by Proposition 4.3. Note that R is contained in a
conjugate of a vertex group Gv in the JSJ-decomposition of G, and
suppose that g has finite order in G but is contained in a different
vertex group of the JSJ-decomposition, so g ∈ Gw with v 6= w. Then,
by Proposition 4.2, g is conjugate to an element of Gv , so h−1 gh ∈ Gv .
Hence, g ∈ Ghv with hv 6= w. However, then g fixes the geodesic
between w and hv, and hence some edge stabiliser contains torsion, a
contradiction.                                                        
5.2. The proof of the Principal Lemma. Theorem A follows quickly
from the Principal Lemma, Lemma 5.6. We begin this section with
Lemma 5.1, which proves the Principal Lemma for HNN-extensions.
The proof of this case is short. The case of free products with amalga-
mation is more involved, and the subsequent four lemmas, Lemmas 5.2–
5.5, prove this case of the Principal Lemma. We then state and prove
the Principal Lemma.
   Recall that if G is a group and T is the normal closure of its torsion
elements then we write G   b := G/T . If G = hX; Rn i is a one-relator
group with torsion then T := hhRii and G    b∼= hX; Ri is a torsion-free
one-relator group, by Proposition 3.1.

HNN-extensions. We shall now prove the Principal Lemma for HNN-
extensions.
Lemma 5.1. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a one-ended one-relator
group with torsion which splits as an HNN-extension G ∼   = H∗At =B
where A and B are virtually-Z groups. Then A, B 6≤ T = hhRii and so
A and B are subgroups of malnormal, infinite cyclic subgroups of G.
Proof. Suppose, without loss of generality, that A ≤ T . We further
have that B ≤ T , as G = hH, t; At = Bi so B is contained in the normal
closure of A. On the other hand, t 6∈ T as T is the normal closure of a
torsion element, and so of an element contained in (a conjugate of) H.
Therefore, G                      b ∗ hti where H
            b is the free product H             b is obtained from H by
quotienting out the normal closure of the torsion elements of H. Thus,
by Lemma 3.2, G is infinitely ended, a contradiction. So A, B 6≤ T and
the result follows from Lemma 4.4.                                   
12                             A.D.LOGAN



Amalgams. We prove, in Lemma 5.5, the analogous result to Lemma 5.1
for free products with amalgamation. Lemma 5.5 states that if G is a
one-ended one-relator group with torsion and if G = A ∗C B where C is
virtually-Z then either C 6≤ T , as in Lemma 5.1, or C and one of A or
B is infinite dihedral. The proof of Lemma 5.5 comprises Lemma 5.2,
which, supposing C ≤ T , gives a form for one of the factor groups
A or B, Lemma 5.3, which investigates when C is infinite cyclic, and
Lemma 5.4, which investigates when C is infinite dihedral.
   Note that Lemmas 5.2 and 5.3 include the case of Z ∗ Cn . This inclu-
sion allows methods of Kapovich–Weidmann to be applied to obtain a
coarse description of the outer automorphism groups of two-generator,
one-relator groups with torsion. This application is outlined in Sec-
tion 6.
   We begin our proof of Lemma 5.5 by giving a form for one of the
factor groups A or B of G = A ∗C B when the the amalgamating
subgroup C is subgroup of T := hhRii. A splitting A ∗C B is called
non-trivial if C A, B.
Lemma 5.2. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a one-relator group with
torsion which is either one-ended or isomorphic to Z∗Cn . Suppose that
G splits non-trivially as a free product with amalgamation G ∼ = A ∗C B
where C is a subgroup of T = hhRii. Then either A ≤ T or B ≤ T . If
A ≤ T (the case of B ≤ T is analogous) then A ∼     = Fm ∗ A1 ∗ A2 ∗ . . .
with each Ai = hai i non-trivial cyclic of order ni dividing n and Fm is
free of rank m ≥ 0. There may be only finitely many Ai , and indeed
there may be none.
Proof. Let A b and Bb be the images of A and B in G  b = G/T . Note that
the image C b of C in Gb is trivial, C
                                     b = 1, and so G
                                                   b=A  b ∗ B.
                                                            b If G is one-
ended then one of the factors A    b or B
                                        b must be trivial, by Lemma 3.2.
     ∼
If G = Z ∗ Cn then G is infinite cyclic so again one of the factors A
                      b                                               b or
Bb must be trivial. Thus, either A ≤ T or B ≤ T .
   As T is the free product of cyclic subgroups of order n, by Proposi-
tion 4.1, the result follows from the Kurosh Subgroup Theorem.          
  Now, if G = A ∗C B is a one-relator group with torsion and the
amalgamating subgroup C is virtually-Z then either C is infinite cyclic
or infinite dihedral, by Proposition 4.3. We shall now, in Lemma 5.3,
investigate the case when C is infinite cyclic, while in Lemma 5.4,
below, we investigate the case when C is infinite dihedral.
  We shall write CA (resp. CB ) for the copy of C in A (resp. B), and
so G = A ∗CA =CB B. If A is a (not necessarily proper) subgroup of
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION13

a group G we define the A-normal closure of a set S ⊂ A, denoted
hhSiiA , to be the normal closure of the set S in the abstract group A,
as opposed to in G. Recall that a splitting A ∗C B is called non-trivial
if C A, B.
Lemma 5.3. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a one-relator group with
torsion which is either one-ended or isomorphic to Z∗Cn . Suppose that
G splits non-trivially as a free product with amalgamation G ∼
                                                             = A ∗C B
where C is infinite cyclic. Then C is not a subgroup of T = hhRii.
Proof. Suppose that C is infinite cyclic and contained in T , and we
shall find a contradiction. As C ≤ T , we can apply Lemma 5.2 to get
that, without loss of generality, A ≤ T and A ∼    = Fm ∗ A1 ∗ A2 ∗ . . . with
each Ai = hai i non-trivial cyclic of order ni dividing n and Fm is free
of rank m ≥ 0. We have two cases: either the root R of the relator Rn
is contained in a conjugate of A or is contained in a conjugate of B.
   Let us consider the second case: Suppose R ∈ g −1 Bg. If A contains
torsion, so A1 = ha1 i is non-trivial, then a1 is conjugate in G to a power
of gRg −1 ∈ B, by Proposition 4.2, and by the conjugacy theorem for
free products with amalgamation [MKS04, Theorem 4.6] we have that
a1 is conjugate to an element of CA , a contradiction as CA is torsion-
free. If A is torsion-free then A ∼     = Fm is the A-normal closure of
CA ∼= Z, as A ≤ T , and so the abstract group A is the normal closure
of a single element. As a group with more generators than relators is
infinite, we have that m = 1, and indeed CA = A, a contradiction.
Hence, if CA ∼ = C is infinite cyclic then R cannot be contained in a
conjugate of B.
   Let us consider the first case: Suppose that R ∈ g −1 Ag, and by re-
writing R we can assume that R ∈ A and indeed that R = a1 , where
A1 = ha1 i. If Ai , i > 1, is non-trivial then the generator ai of Ai is
conjugate to a power of a1 , by Proposition 4.2, and so there exists some
k ∈ Z such that ak1 and ai are conjugate in G but not in A. Therefore,
by the conjugacy theorem for free products with amalgamation, ak1 and
ai are both contained in conjugates of the amalgamating subgroup CA ,
a contradiction as CA is torsion-free. Thus, A ∼    = Fm ∗ A1 where Fm is
free of rank m ≥ 1 and A1 is finite cyclic (Fm cannot be trivial as G is
one-ended).
   Now, as the subgroup T is the G-normal closure of R = a1 , and
because A is a subgroup of T , we have that CA intersects the A-normal
closure of a1 non-trivially, hha1 iiA ∩ CA 6= 1. Then, as A/hha1 iiA ∼  = Fm
is torsion-free and because CA is infinite cyclic, we have that CA ≤
hha1 iiA . On the other hand, as A is contained in the G-normal closure
of a1 we have that the A-normal closure of a1 and CA must be the
14                               A.D.LOGAN

whole of A, hha1 , CA iiA = A. Then, as hha1 , Ca iiA = hha1 iiA , the
group A ∼= Fm ∗ A1 is the normal closure of a single element, and so
m = 0, a contradiction. Hence, if CA ∼ = C is infinite cyclic then R
cannot be contained in a conjugate of A.
  Combining the cases, we conclude that if C is infinite cyclic then R
cannot be contained in a conjugate of A or of B, a contradiction. 

  We shall now analyse how a one-ended one-relator group with torsion
can split as a free-product with amalgamation over an infinite dihedral
group. This, combined with Lemma 5.3, shall prove Lemma 5.5, which
proves the case of free products with amalgamation in the Principal
Lemma.
  If A is a (not necessarily proper) subgroup of a group G we say
two elements g, h ∈ A ≤ G are A-conjugate if there exists an element
k ∈ A such that k −1 gk = h. Recall that a splitting A ∗C B is called
non-trivial if C    A, B. We shall again use CA to denote the copy of
the amalgamating subgroup C contained in the factor group A.
Lemma 5.4. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a one-ended one-relator
group with torsion. Suppose that G splits non-trivially as a free product
with amalgamation G ∼   = A ∗C B where C is infinite dihedral. Then
either A or B is infinite dihedral.
Proof. As C is infinite dihedral it is generated by two elements of order
two, C ∼= C2 ∗ C2 , and so C ≤ T . We can then apply Lemma 5.2 to get
that, without loss of generality, A ≤ T and A ∼  = Fm ∗ A1 ∗ A2 ∗ . . . with
each Ai = hai i non-trivial cyclic of order ni dividing n and Fm is free
of rank m. Now, because A ≤ T and T is the normal closure of the
torsion elements, the subgroup A is equal to the A-normal closure of
CA along with the finite cyclic factors, A = hhCA , A1 , A2 , . . .iiA , and so
is the A-normal closure of torsion elements. Hence, m = 0. Note that
both A1 = ha1 i and A2 = ha2 i must be non-trivial as otherwise A is
finite cyclic. Suppose, without loss of generality, that A1 is of maximal
order in the free-factor groups Ai .
   In order to prove the lemma it is sufficient to prove that A is infinite
dihedral. To prove this we shall use the fact that, for all i > 1, a1 and
ai are both conjugates of powers of the element R, by Proposition 4.2.
There are two cases: either the root R of the relator Rn is contained
in a conjugate of A or is contained in a conjugate of B.
   Let us consider the second case: Suppose R ∈ g −1 Bg. Then, by
the conjugacy theorem for free products with amalgamation, we have
that A-conjugates of each ai are contained in the free-factor group CA ,
and so a1 and each ai , i > 1, have order two. This observation also
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION15

implies that A has no more than two A-conjugacy classes of elements
of finite order, because CA ∼= D∞ has precisely two conjugacy classes of
elements of finite order. Now, suppose A is not infinite dihedral. Then
A3 = ha3 i is non-trivial, and as A is a free product with a1 , a2 and a3
in different free factors we have that these three elements are pairwise
non-conjugate in A. Hence, A has at least three A-conjugacy classes
of elements of finite order, which is a contradiction. Thus, A is infinite
dihedral.
    Let us consider the first case: Suppose R ∈ g −1 Ag. Then we can
re-write R to get that R ∈ A, and indeed that R = a1 . Therefore,
each ai , i > 1, is a G-conjugate of a power of a1 , ak1i say, but not
an A-conjugate of ak1i . Thus, applying the conjugacy theorem for free
                                                                       n/2
products with amalgamation, we have that an A-conjugate of a1 is
contained in CA and an A-conjugate of each ai is contained in CA .
As with the previous case, applying the fact that the infinite dihedral
group has two conjugacy classes of elements of order two yields that
A = A1 ∗ A2 with A2 ∼   = C2 , and here A1 ∼ = Cn .
    To complete the proof of this case it is sufficient to prove that n = 2,
as A ∼ = Cn ∗ C2 . Suppose n > 2. Now, G = hX; Rn i and consider
G0 = hX; Rn/2 i. Then the image of C in G0 is trivial and so G0 ∼  = A0 ∗B 0
where A0 ∼  = Cn/2 and B 0 is non-trivial (as G c0 ∼= hX; Ri is non-trivial
        0                 0          0
and B surjects onto G  c). Thus, G is infinitely ended. Then, because
G 0
c=G  ∼  b we can apply Lemma 3.2 to get that G is infinitely ended, a
contradiction. Thus, n = 2 and A is infinite dihedral, as required.
    Combining the cases proves the result.                                 
  We now give our classification of the ways in which a one-ended
one-relator group with torsion can split as a free product with amal-
gamation over a virtually-Z subgroup. Recall that for G = hX; Rn i,
T := hhRii denotes the normal closure of the element R and that a
splitting A ∗C B is called non-trivial if C A, B.
Lemma 5.5. Assume that G = hX; Rn i is a one-ended one-relator
group with torsion. If G splits non-trivially as a free product with amal-
gamation G ∼ = A ∗C B over a virtually-Z subgroup C then one of the
following occurs.
    (1) C 6≤ T , and so C is a subgroup of a malnormal, infinite cyclic
        subgroup of G.
    (2) Both A and C are infinite dihedral.
    (3) Both B and C are infinite dihedral.
Proof. By Proposition 4.3, C is either infinite cyclic or infinite dihedral.
By Lemma 4.4, if C 6≤ T then C is a subgroup of a malnormal, infinite
16                             A.D.LOGAN

cyclic subgroup of G. On the other hand, suppose C ≤ T . Then, by
Lemma 5.3, C is infinite dihedral, and then, by Lemma 5.4, one of A
or B is infinite dihedral.                                        
  We now prove the Principal Lemma, which gives a description of the
edge groups of the JSJ-decompositions of one-ended one-relator groups
with torsion.
Lemma 5.6 (Principal Lemma). Suppose G = hX; Rn i is a one-ended
one-relator group with torsion. If v is an elementary vertex in the
JSJ-decomposition of G then one of the following occurs.
   (1) The vertex v has arbitrary degree, and Gv 6≤ T . Thus, Gv is a
       subgroup of a malnormal, infinite cyclic subgroup of G.
   (2) The vertex v has degree one, and, writing e for the incident
       edge, both Gv and Ge are infinite dihedral.
Proof. Let Γ be the graph underlying the JSJ-decomposition of G. Let
v be an arbitrary elementary vertex of Γ and let e be an edge incident
to v. We shall prove that either Ge 6≤ T (which implies Gv 6≤ T ) or v
is an elementary vertex of degree one whose vertex group and adjacent
edge group are each infinite dihedral. Combining the first case with
Lemma 4.4 proves the theorem. Recall that Ge is virtually-Z.
   Suppose e is not a separating edge of Γ. Then G splits as an HNN-
extension over Ge , so G = A∗Gte =G0e . Thus, by Lemma 5.1, we have
that Ge 6≤ T , as required.
   Suppose e is a separating edge of Γ. Then G splits as a free product
with amalgamation over Ge , so G = A ∗Ge B where Ge A, B. Thus,
by Lemma 5.5, we have that either Ge 6≤ T or Ge and one of A or B is
infinite dihedral. Suppose, without loss of generality, that A is infinite
dihedral. Then A corresponds to an elementary vertex v of degree one
in the JSJ-decomposition, where Gv = A is infinite dihedral and v is a
vertex of the edge e. This prove the lemma.                             
5.3. The proof of Theorem A. We now prove Theorem A, as stated
in the introduction to Section 5. The proof follows quickly from the
Principal Lemma, Lemma 5.6.
Proof of Theorem A. We shall prove that precisely one non-elementary
vertex group of the JSJ-decomposition of G contains torsion. That all
other non-elementary vertex groups are torsion-free hyperbolic follows
immediately as all vertex groups in a JSJ-decomposition are hyperbolic.
The classification of elementary vertices follows from Lemma 5.6.
  Note that the root R of the relator Rn is contained in a conjugate of
a vertex group Gv in the JSJ-decomposition of G, and suppose that g
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION17

has finite order in G but is contained in a different vertex group of the
JSJ-decomposition, so g ∈ Gw with v 6= w. Collapse each elementary
vertex of degree one into its adjacent vertex. In the resulting graph
of groups, R is contained in a conjugate of a vertex group Gv0 , and
the element g of finite order is contained in a different vertex group,
so g ∈ Gw0 with v 0 6= w0 . Then, by Proposition 4.2, g is conjugate to
some element of Gv0 , so h−1 gh ∈ Gv0 . Hence, g ∈ Ghv0 with hv 0 6= w.
However, then g fixes the geodesic between w and hv 0 , and hence some
edge stabiliser contains torsion, a contradiction.                     

   The possible existence of elementary vertices whose associated group
is infinite dihedral in Theorem A, which we shall call dihedral ver-
tices, is merely a technical quirk resulting from the definition of a
JSJ-decomposition which we used (as opposed to the definition as
a deformation space, which omits elementary vertices [DG11]) and
does not impinge on our partial resolution of the folk conjecture. In-
deed, we do not know if there exist any one-relator group with tor-
sion G whose JSJ-decomposition contains dihedral vertices3, but given
such a JSJ-decomposition one can sink each dihedral vertex into its
unique adjacent vertex and the resulting decomposition is still canoni-
cal. Moreover, any dihedral vertices in the JSJ-decompositon of such a
group G are ignored when studying the outer automorphism group of
G [Lev05] [DG11] [Log14], or when computing the isomorphism class
of G [DG11].


   6. Two-generator, one-relator groups with torsion
  In this section we state two theorems relating to the structure of
non-Fuchsian one-ended two-generator, one-relator groups with torsion.
Note that a two-generator, one-relator group with torsion ha, b; Rn i is
Fuchsian if and only if [a, b] is a cyclic shift of R or R−1 [FR93] [Pri77a].
The first of these theorems, Theorem 6.1, gives, in a certain sense, the
possibilities for the JSJ-decomposition of a non-Fuchsian one-ended
two-generator, one-relator group with torsion. The second of these
theorems, Theorem 6.2, applies Theorem 6.1 to prove that the outer
automorphism groups of these groups are virtually-cyclic.
  We have not included the proofs of Theorems 6.1 and 6.2 in this pa-
per. This is because these theorems closely parallel results of Kapovich–
Weidmann for two-generator torsion-free hyperbolic groups [KW99]

  3See Question 2 from the introduction.
18                             A.D.LOGAN

and, because of Lemma 5.6, the global structure of the proofs of Kapovich–
Weidmann can be applied with only minor alterations. The altered
proofs have been written out in full in the authors PhD thesis [Log14].
   Theorem 6.1 encodes the possibilities for the JSJ-decomposition of a
two-generator, one-relator group with torsion. It describes the possible
graph structure underlying a graph of groups decomposition of a two-
generator, one-relator group with torsion G where all edge stabilisers
are virtually-Z and no vertex stabiliser is virtually-Z. This encodes
the JSJ-decomposition of the group G because sinking the elementary
vertices into adjacent vertices in the JSJ-decomposition yields a graph
of groups where the underlying graph does not depend on how we dealt
with the elementary vertices.
Theorem 6.1. Assume that G is a one-ended two-generator, one-
relator group with torsion with G ∼  6= ha, b; [a, b]n i. Suppose that G is
the fundamental group of a graph of groups Γ where all edge stabilisers
are virtually-Z and no vertex-stabiliser is virtually-Z. Then the graph
Γ underlying Γ is one of the following.
    (1) A single vertex with no edges.
    (2) A single vertex with a single loop edge.
Moreover, the vertex group is a two-generator, one-relator group with
torsion.
  Theorem 6.2 applies Theorem 6.1 to prove that the outer automor-
phism groups of non-Fuchsian two-generator, one-relator groups with
torsion are virtually-cyclic. The proof is, in essence, an application of
results of Levitt [Lev05] to Theorem 6.1.
Theorem 6.2. Assume that G is a one-ended two-generator, one-
relator group with torsion. Then either Out(G) is virtually-cyclic or
G∼ = ha, b; [a, b]n i for some n > 1.
   Using Theorem 6.2 as a starting point, it can be shown that a one-
ended two-generator, one-relator group with torsion has outer auto-
morphism group isomorphic to one of only a finite number of groups,
all of which are subgroup of GL2 (Z) [Log16] (see also the author’s PhD
thesis [Log14]).
           7. Some examples of JSJ-decompositions
   We end the paper by giving some examples of one-relator groups with
torsion which have non-trivial JSJ-decomposition. These examples
demonstrate that the statement of Theorem A is non-trivial. We first
give a two-generator example, before demonstrating a general method
for producing examples with arbitrary number of generators.
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION19

                                            hxi


                                  he1 i              he2 i


                                  Gv = hb, c; (bc2 )2 i

      Figure 1. Omitting elementary vertices of degree 1, the
      JSJ-decomposition of the group G = ha, t; (t−1 a−1 ta2 )2 i is
      the above graph of groups. Edge maps are given by e1 7→ x,
      by e2 7→ x, by e1 7→ b and by e2 7→ c2 .

Example 7.1. Consider the following one-relator group with torsion.
                             G = ha, t; (t−1 a−1 ta2 )2 i
The group G splits as an HNN-extension with stable letter t and base
group hb, c; (bc2 )2 i ∼
                       = Z ∗ C2 , the free product of the infinite cyclic group
with the cyclic group of order two. By Theorem 6.1, the vertices of
degree greater than one of the JSJ-decomposition of G consist of a
single rigid vertex with vertex group Z ∗ C2 and an elementary vertex
with vertex group Z. These vertices are connected with two edges, so
that sinking the elementary vertex into the rigid vertex we obtain the
aforementioned HNN-extension. This is illustrated in Figure 1.
  Example 7.1 is of interest because B.B.Newman demonstrated that
the group G contains a three-generated subgroup which is neither free
nor a one-relator group with torsion [Pri77b]. Therefore, this group was
a possible counter-example to the folk conjecture which motivates this
paper and, following our formalisation of the folk conjecture, a possible
counter-example to Question 1 as stated in the introduction. The above
demonstrates that the construction is, in fact, not a counter-example
to our JSJ-decomposition interpretation of the folk-conjecture.

More than two generators. The following example easily generalises
to give a method for producing one-relator groups with torsion G with
an arbitrary number m > 2 of generators which have non-trivial JSJ-
decomposition.
Example 7.2. Consider the following one-relator group with torsion,
where n is odd.
             G = ha, b, c, d; ([a2 , b2 ]2 [c2 , d2 ][a2 , b2 ]−3 [c2 , d2 ])n i
20                                    A.D.LOGAN


                             Gv = hx, y; (x2 yx−3 y)n i

                                   he2 i         he3 i
                     he1 i hqi                           hpi he4 i

            ha, bi                                                    hc, di

      Figure 2. The JSJ-decomposition of the group G =
      ha, b, c, d; ([a2 , b2 ]2 [c2 , d2 ][a2 , b2 ]−3 [c2 , d2 ])n i, n > 1 odd, is
      the above graph of groups. Edge maps are given by e1 7→
      [a2 , b2 ], by e2 7→ x, by e3 7→ y, and by e4 7→ [c2 , d2 ]; all other
      edge maps are trivial.

The group G splits as a free product with amalgamation as follows.
           G = ha, bi ∗[a2 ,b2 ]=x hx, y; (x2 yx−3 y)n i ∗y=[c2 ,d2 ] hc, di
The middle group hx, y; (x2 yx−3 y)n i has finite outer automorphism group
[Log14, Lemma 3.4.6] so this splitting cannot be refined further. There-
fore, adding in elementary vertices to split each edge yields the JSJ-
decomposition of the group G. This is illustrated in Figure 2.
   This construction can be generalised by taking the relator to be the
product of words over disjoint alphabets. Note that in a group obtained
from this generalisation, one vertex group in the analogous splitting is
a one-relator group with torsion, and all other vertex groups are free,
by the Freiheitssatz [MKS04, Theorem 4.10].

                                   References
[Bow98] B.H. Bowditch, Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic groups,
        Acta Math. 180 (1998), no. 2, 145–186.
[Ceb71] A.A. Cebotar, Subgroups of groups with one defining relation that do not
        contain free subgroups of rank 2, Algebra i Logica 10 (1971), 570–586.
[DG11] F. Dahmani and V. Guirardel, The isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic
        groups, Geom. Funct. Anal. 21 (2011), no. 2, 223–300.
[FKS72] J. Fischer, A. Karrass, and D. Solitar, On one-relator groups having ele-
        ments of finite order, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc 33 (1972), 297–301.
[FR93] B. Fine and G. Rosenberger, Classification of all generating pairs of two
        generator Fuchsian groups, from: Groups 93 Galway/St. Andrews, Vol. 1
        (Galway, 1993), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. 211 (1993), 205–
        232.
[FT15] S. Friedl and S. Tillmann, Two-generator one-relator groups and marked
        polytopes, arXiv: 1501.03489 (2015).
[Hat00] A. Hatcher, Notes on basic 3-manifold topology.
  THE JSJ-DECOMPOSITIONS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION21

[IT15]   K. Ichihara and Y. Temma, Non-left-orderable surgeries and general-
         ized baumslag–solitar relators, J. Knot Theory Ramifications 24 (2015),
         no. 01, 1550003.
[KMS60] A. Karrass, W. Magnus, and D. Solitar, Elements of finite order in groups
         with a single defining relation, Comm. on Pure App. Math. 13 (1960),
         no. 1, 57–66.
[KS71] A. Karrass and D. Solitar, Subgroups of HNN groups and groups with one
         defining relation, Canad. J. Math 23 (1971), no. 4, 627–643.
[KW99] I. Kapovich and R. Weidmann, On the structure of two-generated hyper-
         bolic groups, Math. Zeitschrift 231 (1999), no. 4, 783–801.
[Lev05] G. Levitt, Automorphisms of hyperbolic groups and graphs of groups,
         Geom. Ded. 114 (2005), no. 1, 49–70.
[Log14] A.D. Logan, The outer automorphism groups of three classes of groups,
         Ph.D. thesis, University of Glasgow, 2014.
[Log16]          , The outer automorphism groups of two-generator one-relator
         groups with torsion, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 144 (2016), no. 10, 4135–
         4150.
[LS77]   R.C. Lyndon and P.E. Schupp, Combinatorial group theory, Classics in
         Mathematics, Springer, 1977.
[Mag30] W. Magnus, Uber diskontinuierliche Gruppen mit einer definerenden Re-
         lation (der Freiheitssatz), J. Reine u. Angew. Math. 163 (1930), 141–165.
[Mag32]          , Das Identitatsproblem fur Gruppen mit einer definerenden Rela-
         tion, Math. Ann. 106 (1932), 295–307.
[MKS04] W. Magnus, A. Karrass, and D. Solitar, Combinatorial group theory,
         Dover Publications, 2nd edition, 2004.
[Pri77a] S.J. Pride, The isomorphism problem for two-generator one-relator groups
         with torsion is solvable, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc 227 (1977), 109–139.
[Pri77b]         , The two-generator subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion,
         Trans. Amer. Math. Soc 234 (1977), no. 2, 483–496.
[RS97] E. Rips and Z. Sela, Cyclic splittings of finitely presented groups and the
         canonical JSJ-decomposition, Ann. Math. (1997), 53–109.
[Sel95] Z. Sela, The isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups I, Ann. Math.
         (1995), 217–283.
[Sel09] Z Sela, Diophantine geometry over groups VII: The elementary theory of
         a hyperbolic group, Proc. Lon. Math. Soc. 99 (2009), 217–273.
[SS03]   J.P. Serre and J. Stilwell, Trees, Springer Monographs in Mathematics,
         Springer, 2003.
[Sta68] J.R. Stallings, On torsion-free groups with infinitely many ends, Ann.
         Math. 88 (1968), no. 2, 312–334.
[Wis12] D.T. Wise, From riches to raags: 3-manifolds, right-angled Artin groups,
         and cubical geometry, vol. 117, American Mathematical Soc., 2012.

  University of Glasgow, School of Mathematics and Statistics, Uni-
versity Gardens, G12 8QW, Scotland
  E-mail address: Alan.Logan@glasgow.ac.uk
