                                             Surface groups among cubulated hyperbolic
                                                       and one-relator groups
arXiv:2406.02121v3 [math.GR] 22 Jan 2026




                                                                           Henry Wilton
                                                                         January 23, 2026

                                                                               Abstract
                                                    Let X be a non-positively curved cube complex with hyperbolic
                                                fundamental group. We prove that π1 (X) has a non-free subgroup of
                                                infinite index unless π1 (X) is either free or a surface group, answering
                                                questions of Gromov and Whyte (in a special case) and Wise. A similar
                                                result for one-relator groups follows, answering a question posed by
                                                several authors. The proof relies on a careful analysis of free and
                                                cyclic splittings of cubulated groups.

                                               Surface groups – the fundamental groups of closed, aspherical surfaces
                                           – and free groups are often seen as close cousins. One way this can be
                                           made precise is to look at their subgroup structures. The Nielsen–Schreier
                                           theorem asserts that every subgroup of a free group is free, while Johansson
                                           also proved that every subgroup of infinite index in a surface group is free
                                           [34]. It is natural to wonder whether this property characterises free and
                                           surface groups. Conjectures and questions along these lines have been stated
                                           under various hypotheses [3, 4, 5, 23, 35, 68].
                                               To the best of the author’s knowledge, the following very general question
                                           is open.
                                           Question 0.1. Let G be an infinite, finitely presented group, such that every
                                           subgroup of infinite index is free. Must G be isomorphic to either a free group
                                           or a surface group?
                                              A finitely generated, but infinitely presented, group with every proper
                                           subgroup isomorphic to Z was constructed by Ol’shanskii [46]. Clearly, a
                                           group G with a surface subgroup can only have every subgroup of infinite
                                           index free if G itself is virtually a surface group, so Question 0.1 can be
                                           thought of as a useful precursor to the famous problem of finding surface
                                           subgroups.

                                                                                   1
    We provide positive answers to Question 0.1 for two important classes
of groups. Recall that a group G is cubulated if G = π1 (X), where X is a
compact, non-positively curved cube complex. Cubulated groups have been
a major theme in geometric group theory for several decades, culminating
in the work of Agol and Wise on the virtual Haken conjecture [1, 69]. Our
main theorem gives a strong positive answer to Question 0.1 for cubulated
hyperbolic groups.
Theorem A. Let G be a cubulated hyperbolic group. Unless G is free or a
surface group, G has a one-ended, quasiconvex subgroup of infinite index.
This answers questions of Gromov and Whyte in the cubulated case [5, Ques-
tions 1.7 and 1.11]. In particular, Theorem A applies to C ′ (1/6) small-
cancellation groups [67].
    The proof makes essential use of the cubulation hypothesis, and removing
it seems to be well beyond current technology. The hyperbolicity hypothesis,
on the other hand, can be relaxed to the assumption that G is virtually special
in the sense of Haglund–Wise [32].1
Corollary B. Let G be the fundamental group of a compact, virtually spe-
cial cube complex. Unless G is free or a surface group, G has a one-ended,
cubically convex-cocompact subgroup of infinite index.
Proof. If G is hyperbolic then the result follows from Theorem A. Otherwise,
Caprace–Haglund proved that G contains a cubically convex-cocompact sub-
group isomorphic to Z2 [13, Corollary 4], and the result follows unless Z2 has
finite index. But, in the latter case, G is a surface group by Bieberbach’s
theorem.
This corollary answers a question asked by Wise in the 2014 ICM proceedings
[68, Question 13.50].
Remark 0.2. The proof of Corollary B will apply to any class of cubulated
groups in which one has a ‘hyperbolisation’ theorem, guaranteeing that a
cubulated group G without a Z2 subgroup must be hyperbolic. Such hyper-
bolisation theorems are also known for cube complexes without cyclic facing
triples [51] and for weakly special cube complexes [43].
   Mapping tori of free-group automorphisms are another appealing class of
groups to which Theorem A applies.
Corollary C. Let F be a finitely generated free group of rank at least 2. Any
semidirect product G = F ⋊ Z has a finitely generated, one-ended subgroup.
   1
     Agol’s theorem asserts that cubulated hyperbolic groups are virtually special, so this
is indeed a relaxation [1].

                                            2
Proof. Brinkmann proved that G is hyperbolic unless G contains a subgroup
isomorphic to Z2 [11]. Since F has rank at least 2, such a subgroup must
have infinite index, so the result follows unless G is hyperbolic. In this case,
G is cubulated by the work of Hagen–Wise [29, 30]. Since G is neither free
nor a surface group, the result again follows, this time by Theorem A.
    Historically, Question 0.1 has received the most attention when G is a
one-relator group. In this context, the question was attributed to Fine–
Rosenberger–Wienke in the Kourovka notebook [35, Question 20.22], but
it has also received attention in many other works on one-relator groups,
sometimes with additional hypotheses [3, 4, 17, 22]. In this context, it is
sometimes referred to as the surface group conjecture. In [65], the author
proved the surface group conjecture for Sela’s limit groups, and also for
graphs of free groups with cyclic edge groups.2
    Most recently, the surface group conjecture was addressed by Gardam–
Kielak–Logan [23, Conjecture 1.4], who proved it in the case when the one-
relator group G has two generators. Combining their work with Theorem A
and other recent advances in our understanding of one-relator groups, the
surface group conjecture follows.

Theorem D. Let G be an infinite one-relator group. Unless G is free or a
surface group, G has a subgroup of infinite index that is not free.

    The alert reader will notice that the conclusion in the case of one-relator
groups is slightly weaker than the conclusions for cubulated hyperbolic or
free-by-cyclic groups. While Theorem A produces a finitely generated (in-
deed, quasiconvex) subgroup that is not free, the non-free subgroup produced
by Theorem D may be infinitely generated.
Remark 0.3. In fact, the proof of Theorem D produces a finitely generated
non-free subgroup unless G has two generators. In the two-generator case, the
stronger result is not true: every finitely generated subgroup of infinite index
in the (1, 2)-Baumslag–Solitar group BS(1, 2) is either trivial or isomorphic
to Z, but BS(1, 2) contains a subgroup isomorphic to the infinitely generated
non-free group Q2 of dyadic rationals. (Cf. Question 6.4 below.)
    The proof of Theorem A is inspired by the author’s proof of the corre-
sponding statement for graphs of free groups with cyclic edge groups [65].
That proof relied on Whitehead theory to recognise relative free splittings of
free groups, so our first task is to generalise that machinery to the context
of non-positively curved cube complexes.
   2
    The latter class includes the classes of cyclically pinched and conjugacy pinched one-
relator groups considered in [17, 22].

                                            3
    Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube complex. We consider
compact, convex subcomplexes Y of the universal cover X,      ̃ and define a
Whitehead complex WhX (Y ). This is a simplicial complex that encodes the
intersections of the bounding hyperplanes of Y , and provides a topological
model for the complement X    ̃ ∖ Y . We will be especially interested in the
minimal cardinality k of a cut set of vertices of WhX (Y ): if there is such a
cut set, then Y is called a k-cut. An essential cube complex X has a 0-cut if
and only if π1 (X) has more than one end.
    We analyse the behaviour of the Whitehead complex when Y is cut along
a hyperplane. It turns out that WhX (Y ) decomposes as a connect sum
in the natural sense for simplicial complexes, in a way that generalises the
work of Manning [42] and Cashen–Macura [16] in the classical context of
Whitehead graphs. Our key technical results analyse how cut sets of vertices
behave under the connect sum operation. This enables us to relate cuts to
links of vertices. The following criterion, a cubical analogue of Whitehead’s
cut-vertex lemma, is a sample application.
Theorem E. Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube complex. If
the link of every vertex is connected and has no cut simplices then π1 (X) has
at most one end.
    While 0-cuts detect free splittings, 1-cuts turn out to obstruct analysing
splittings over non-trivial subgroups. Fortunately, using recent work of Shep-
herd [55], as long as π1 (X) is one-ended we may assume that X has no 1-cuts.
    Assuming π1 (X) is one-ended, our next task is to analyse splittings over
Z, and to do this we restrict to the case when π1 (X) is hyperbolic. The ap-
proach generalises work of Cashen–Macura [16] and Cashen [15], who showed
that a line pattern in a free group does not split over Z if and only if there is
a bound on the diameters of cut pairs in the Whitehead graph. We prove an
analogous result, Theorem 3.13, which asserts that π1 (X) is cyclically inde-
composable if and only if there is a uniform bound on the widths of 2-cuts.
The point is that cyclic splittings correspond to periodic 2-cuts, from which
a pigeonhole argument implies a bound on the width of a 2-cut if π1 (X)
is cyclically indecomposable. Using the projection-complex machinery of
Bestvina–Bromberg–Fujiwara [6], and their improved version with Sisto [7],
we strengthen this to a uniform bound on the widths of k-cuts, independent
of k.
    With these technical results in hand, we are ready to prove Theorem A.
Using the Grushko and JSJ decompositions, and since the case of graphs of
free groups with cyclic edge groups is already known, we may reduce to the
cyclically indecomposable case. By the above analysis, we may assume that
X has no 0- or 1-cuts, and that there is a uniform bound C on the widths of

                                       4
k-cuts. Agol’s theorem [1] implies that hyperplane stabilisers are separable,
so we may pass to a finite-sheeted cover X0 → X with the property that,
for some hyperplane H of X,   ̃ every π1 (X0 )-translate of H is at distance > C
from H. Cutting X0 along H and passing to a connected component X ′
gives a quasiconvex subgroup that is necessarily of infinite index. But now a
0-cut in X ′ would lead to a k-cut in X of width greater than C, which is a
contradiction, so π1 (X ′ ) is not free, as required.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 1 contains preliminaries on
non-positively curved complexes, cube complexes and simplicial complexes.
Experts may wish to jump straight to Section 2, where we define Whitehead
complexes and use them to analyse free splittings, including proving Theorem
E. In Section 3 we extend the analysis to cyclic splittings in the hyperbolic
case. Section 4 contains the proofs of the main theorems. Section 5 records a
counterexample to a natural generalisation of Theorem A, while some open
questions are listed in Section 6.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Mark Hagen for useful conversations about this work, most
especially for suggesting Lemma 3.21, which greatly simplifies the argument.
Thanks also to Macarena Arenas, Jack Button, Chris Cashen, Mark Hagen
again, Marco Linton, Lars Louder and Sam Shepherd for comments on a
preliminary draft. The second draft benefitted from comments from Martin
Bridson, Anthony Genevois and Chris Hruska. Special thanks to Macarena
Arenas (again), Misha Kapovich and Genevieve Walsh for help with §5. Fi-
nally, thanks to the referees for suggesting many improvements.


1    Preliminaries
Two kinds of cell complexes will be of particular importance in this pa-
per. On the one hand, our main objects of study are non-positively curved
cube complexes and their universal covers, which are CAT(0). On the other
hand, we will study them by constructing certain simplicial complexes, called
Whitehead complexes. In this section, we recall some basic facts about all
these classes of complexes. The reader is referred to the standard reference
[10] for background material on cube complexes and other metric polyhedral
complexes, and for details of much of what follows.
    All complexes that we consider will be locally finite.




                                       5
1.1    Non-positively curved cube complxes
A cube complex X is a cell complex constructed from a disjoint union of
finite-dimensional unit cubes by identifying faces isometrically [10, Example
I.7.40(4)]. Further, we will also assume that cubes are embedded, and that
the intersection of any two cubes is either empty or a face (i.e. X is cubical
in the sense of Bridson–Haefliger [10, Definition I.7.32]); this can always be
ensured by subdividing.
    The link LkX (x) of a point x in a metric polyhedral complex X is the
space of directions at x, i.e. the space of germs of geodesics emanating from x
[10, I.7.38], and admits a natural angular metric. When X is a cube complex
and x is a vertex, LkX (x) has the natural structure of a simplicial complex,
where the simplices are the corners of the cubes incident at x.
    As long as a cube complex X is finite-dimensional, X admits a natural
complete geodesic metric in which every k-cube is locally isometric to [0, 1]k ⊆
Rk . We will refer to this metric as the ℓ2 -metric on X. Gromov’s link
condition asserts that a polyhedral complex is non-positively curved – i.e.
the metric is locally CAT(0) – if and only if the angular metric on the link
of any point is CAT(1) [27, 4.2.A]. Gromov further proved that, when X is
a cube complex, the link condition is satisfied if and only if the link of every
vertex is flag, meaning that, for every k ≥ 2, every k-clique in the 1-skeleton
of X is the 1-skeleton.
    The features of a non-positively curved cube complex X can often be cap-
tured by studying its hyperplanes. Let C be a k-dimensional cube, identified
with [−1/2, 1/2]k ⊆ Rk . A hypercube of C is an intersection of C with any
coordinate hyperplane of Rk . The set of hypercubes of cubes in X form a
natural directed system under inclusion, and gluing along these inclusions
gives a cube complex with a natural map to X. The path components of this
cube complexes are the hyperplanes of X.
    It is immediate from the definition that the natural map from a hyper-
plane H to X is a local isometry. Therefore, if X is non-positively curved
then H is too.
    Since hyperplanes are constructed by gluing together hypercubes of X,
each hyperplane H → X admits a natural (closed) cubical neighbourhood
N (H), which is a bundle over H with fibre a closed interval. We may write
NX (H) when we want to emphasise that H is a hyperplane of X. Likewise,
N (H) has a natural interior N̊ (H), also a bundle over H with fibre an open
interval. The hyperplane H is said to be two-sided when these bundles are
trivial.
    If the map H → X is injective we say that H is embedded. In this case,
the interior N̊ (H) is also naturally embedded in X. The complement X0 =


                                       6
X ∖ N̊ (H) is a locally convex subcomplex of X, and is said to be obtained
by cutting X along H. In this case, we write X = X0 ∪H . When H is two-
sided, this expresses X as a graph of spaces in the sense of Scott and Wall
[52]. As long as X itself is connected, the vertex space X0 has at most two
components, and if there are two then we write X = X1 ∪H X2 in the obvious
way.
    Finally, we can make use of the following important lemma [10, Proposi-
tion II.4.14].

Lemma 1.1. Let X, Y be complete, connected, geodesic, metric spaces. If
X is non-positively curved then any local isometry Y → X is injective on
fundamental groups.

Thus, the inclusion of a hyperplane is π1 -injective, so cutting along H also
decomposes the fundamental group G = π1 (X) as a graph of groups in the
sense of Serre [53], with a single edge group π1 (H).

1.2    CAT(0) cube complexes
When X is non-positively curved, the natural geodesic metric on the universal
cover X̃ is CAT(0), by the Cartan–Hadamard theorem [27, §4]. This gives
us access to the standard tools of CAT(0) geometry detailed in [10], which
are especially useful when studying a closed, convex subspace Y ⊆ X.  ̃ For
                                                          ̃
instance, we may define the orthogonal projection πY ∶ X → Y as in [10,
Proposition II.2.4].
    One important consequence of the uniqueness of geodesics in CAT(0)
spaces is that any local isometry between CAT(0) spaces is a global isometric
embedding [10, Proposition II.4.14]. Thus, the map from a hyperplane H →
X lifts to a convex embedding of the universal cover H  ̃ ↪ X, ̃ and so the
                 ̃
hyperplanes of X are the universal covers of the hyperplanes of X.
    The natural map N (H) → X is also a local isometry. Thus, the map
N (H) → X also lifts to an embedding
                           ̃
                           N          ̃ ↪X
                             (H) = N (H) ̃.

The interval bundle N (H)̃ is necessarily trivial because H ̃ is simply con-
nected, so H̃ is embedded and two-sided, and cutting along H  ̃ realises X
                                                                         ̃ as
                            ̃                                    ̃
a graph of spaces. Because X is simply connected it follows that H separates
it into two, and so we have
                               ̃=U
                               X ̃+ ∪ ̃ U
                                        ̃
                                     H −




                                     7
for two convex subcomplexes U  ̃± . These subcomplexes are called the half-
           ̃
spaces of H.
    It is usually important when studying CAT(0) cube complexes to rule
out ‘uninteresting’ half-spaces that are within a bounded distance of the
corresponding hyperplane.

Definition 1.2. A hyperplane H     ̃ of a CAT(0) cube complex X      ̃ is called
                                  ̃ is within a bounded neighbourhood of H.
inessential if some half-space of H                                           ̃
If X̃ has no inessential hyperplanes then X̃ itself is called essential. We will
call a non-positively curved complex X essential or inessential according to
its universal cover.

   Fortunately, we may always assume that X is essential by invoking a
result of Caprace–Sageev [14, Proposition 3.5].

Lemma 1.3. Every compact, non-positively curved cube complex X defor-
mation retracts to an essential, convex subcomplex of its first subdivision.

   Hyperplanes also make it possible to define a notion of convex hull for a
          ̃
subset of X.

Definition 1.4. For any subset Y of a CAT(0) cube complex X,     ̃ the cubical
                                                                             ̃
convex hull Hull(Y ) is defined to be the intersection of the half-spaces of X
that contain Y .

   It is important to be able to control the geometry of convex hulls, and we
can do this using a fundamental theorem of Haglund. This theorem makes
                                           ̃
use of the ℓ1 -metric on (the vertices of) X.

Definition 1.5. Let X  ̃ be a CAT(0) cube complex. The ℓ1 -metric on the
1-skeleton X declares the distance between two points x and y to be equal
             (1)

to the length of the shortest path in X (1) between them.

    Note that the ℓ1 -metric on X (1) is also geodesic, and that the ℓ1 distance
between two vertices is exactly the number of hyperplanes that separate them
[50, Lemma 3.8].
    The following lemma proves that orthogonal projection from a convex
subcomplex to a hyperplane must land in their intersection, if it is non-
empty.

Lemma 1.6. Let X      ̃ be a CAT(0) cube complex, let Y ⊆ X
                                                          ̃ be a convex
subcomplex, and let H be a hyperplane of X.̃ If H ∩ Y is non-empty then
πH (y) ∈ Y , for all y ∈ Y .


                                       8
Proof. Let y ∈ Y and x = πH∩Y (y); we shall prove that x = πH (y). Since
the result is trivial if y = x, we may assume that y ≠ x and choose z ≠ x in
the intersection of the geodesic [x, y] with the carrier NY (H ∩ Y ). But x =
πH∩Y (z) so, in the product coordinates on NY (H ∩Y ) ≅ (H ∩Y )×[−1/2, 1/2],
we have z = (x, t) for some t. The product coordinates extend naturally to
NX̃ (H), so the geodesic [x, z] is orthogonal to every geodesic in H through
x, and hence [x, y] is also. Therefore, x = πH (y) and the result follows.
   The next lemma is useful for relating the ℓ1 and ℓ2 distances.

Lemma 1.7. Let Y1 , Y2 be convex subcomplexes of a CAT(0) cube complex
̃ Suppose that a geodesic γ minimises the ℓ2 -distance from Y1 to Y2 . A
X.
hyperplane H separates Y1 from Y2 if and only if γ crosses H.

Proof. The necessity is obvious, so it remains to prove that, if γ crosses H,
then H separates Y1 from Y2 . Suppose that γ(0) ∈ Y1 and γ crosses H at
γ(t). Because γ minimises the distance, it makes an angle of at least π/2 with
each geodesic in Y1 through γ(0). By Lemma 1.6, πH (γ(0)) ∈ Y1 . Hence,
if H intersects Y1 then γ(0), γ(t) and πH (γ(0)) form a triangle with two
right angles, contradicting the hypothesis that X  ̃ is CAT(0). Therefore, H
is disjoint from Y1 , and likewise from Y2 . Since γ crosses H once, it follows
that H separates Y1 from Y2 , as required.
   We can now state Haglund’s theorem [31, Theorem H]

Theorem 1.8 (Haglund). Let X       ̃ be a d-dimensional CAT(0) cube complex
and Y ⊆ X ̃ (0) a set of vertices that is κ-quasiconvex in the ℓ1 -metric. There
is R = R(d, κ) such that every point of Hull(Y ) is at distance at most R from
a point of Y .

   One useful consequence is to characterise geometrically well-behaved sub-
groups. A subgroup H of the fundamental group of a non-positively curved
cube complex X is called cubically convex-cocompact if H acts cocompactly
on a subcomplex Y ⊆ X   ̃ that is convex in the ℓ2 -metric. Note that, by [31,
Theorem 2.13], a subcomplex is convex in the ℓ2 -metric if and only if it is
convex in the ℓ1 -metric.

Corollary 1.9. Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube complex. A
subgroup H of π1 (X) is cubically convex-cocompact if and only if the H-orbit
of some vertex is quasiconvex in the ℓ1 -metric.




                                       9
1.3    Simplicial complexes
As the above discussion makes clear, our investigations of cube complexes
will often be metric. By contrast, when simplicial complexes arise, we will
be interested in their combinatorial structure, and especially interested in
collections of vertices and simplices that separate. Here, we introduce the
necessary terminology.
    We already saw that, in a metric complex, the link of a point can be
thought of metrically as a space of directions. In a simplicial complex, it is
convenient to give an equivalent combinatorial definition, which also extends
to certain subcomplexes. A subcomplex B of a simplicial complex A is called
full if, whenever all the vertices of a simplex σ are in B, then σ itself is in B.




                    B                                          B




               StA (B)                                    LkA (B)


Figure 1: An example of an open star and a link. The example is a closed
disc, triangulated as the union of four 2-simplices; the subcomplex B is the
vertex in the centre. On the left, the open star is illustrated as the union of
the grey open 2-simplices and the black 0- and 1-simplices. On the right, the
link is illustrated: it is the union of the 0- and 1-simplices shaded black.

Definition 1.10 (Stars and links). Let A be a simplicial complex and B ⊆ A
a full subcomplex. The open star of B, StA (B), is the union of the interiors
of the simplices of A that contain a simplex of B as a face. The link of B,
LkA (B), is the set of faces of simplices of StA (B) that are disjoint from B.
See Figure 1.
    Note that StA (B) may not be a subcomplex of A, but LkA (B) always is.
Furthermore, after putting a suitable metric on A, for any vertex v, LkA (v)
coincides with the metric definition of link given in §1.1.

                                       10
    As mentioned above, we are especially interested in the separation prop-
erties of subcomplexes.

Definition 1.11 (Cut sets and connectivity). Let A be a simplicial complex
and B a full subcomplex. Write AB ∶= A ∖ St(B). The subcomplex B is said
to separate A if AB is disconnected. If B is a simplex we say B is a cut
simplex.
   In the specific case where B is a set of k pairwise non-adjacent vertices,
we say that B is a cut set for A. If #B = 1 we say B is a cut vertex, and if
#B = 2 we say B is a cut pair. If A has no cut set of cardinality at most k,
then A is said to be k-vertex-connected.


2         Free splittings
In 1936, J.H.C. Whitehead explained how to determine whether an element
w of a free group F is primitive. For a fixed basis B of F , his algorithm
uses a graph WhB (w) which is now known as the Whitehead graph [63].
His algorithm can equally be interpreted as searching for free splittings F ≅
⟨w⟩ ∗ F ′ . Many elaborations and generalisations of Whitehead’s argument
have been given over the years by, among others, Lyon [41], Stallings [59] and
Stong [60]. Diao–Feighn, building on work of Gersten [26], gave an algorithm
to compute the Grushko decomposition of a graph of free groups [18].3
    The power of this point of view is that global information about a group
G – whether or not G is free, or splits freely, or most generally the structure
of the Grushko decomposition of G – is encoded in the local information of
a Whitehead graph, which can be read off a presentation. The following
theorem, which is the result of combining Whitehead’s algorithm with a
theorem of Shenitzer [54, Theorem 5], exemplifies this idea in the case of
one-relator groups.

Theorem 2.1. Consider a one-relator group G = F /⟪w⟫ and fix a basis B
for F . If the Whitehead graph WhB (w) is connected without cut vertices,
then G does not split freely.

Note that WhB (w) is exactly the link of the unique vertex in the natural
presentation complex for G. Our goal is to develop a similar theory for non-
positively curved cube complexes. To this end, our first task is to generalise
the notion of Whitehead graph to the context of non-positively curved cube
complexes.
    3
        See the recent preprint of Dicks for a comprehensive history of this topic [19, §2].



                                                11
2.1    Bounding hyperplanes and Whitehead complexes
In this section, we introduce the Whitehead complexes that will be our main
technical tool. While the use we put them to here appears to be new,
they bear some similarities with crossing graphs and crossing complexes for
CAT(0) cube complexes, which have been studied extensively in a wide va-
riety of contexts – see, for instance, [24, 28, 45, 49], among many other
examples.
    Let X be a non-positively curved cube complex, let X̃ → X be its univer-
sal cover and let Y ⊆ X̃ be a convex subcomplex. Equivalently, we may think
of Y as a CAT(0) complex equipped with a locally isometric combinatorial
map Y → X – any such immersion lifts to an embedding Y ↪ X,       ̃ and all
such embeddings differ by a deck transformation of X.
Definition 2.2. A hyperplane H of X   ̃ bounds Y if it is disjoint from Y but
no other hyperplane separates Y from H. Equivalently, H and Y are disjoint,
but Y intersects the (closed) regular neighbourhood N (H) ≅ H × [0, 1]. We
may orient the interval factor so that the intersection is of the form HY ×
{0}, where HY is a convex subcomplex of H called the bounding hyperplane
component of Y in H.
   The Whitehead complex associated to such a Y encodes the way that the
bounding hyperplanes of Y intersect each other.
Definition 2.3. Let X be a non-positively curved cube complex, and Y
a convex subcomplex of the universal cover X.      ̃ The Whitehead complex
of Y , WhX (Y ), is a simplicial complex defined as follows. The vertices
of WhX (Y ) are the bounding hyperplanes of Y . A finite set of bounding
hyperplanes H = {H0 , . . . , Hk } spans a k-simplex σH in WhX (Y ) if and only
if the intersection ⋂ki=0 Hi is non-empty.
Remark 2.4. The Helly property for hyperplanes of CAT(0) cube complexes,
proved by Sageev, asserts that if a set of hyperplanes intersect pairwise then
their intersection is non-empty [50, Theorem 4.14]. Hence, Whitehead com-
plexes are flag.
   The name is justified by the following example.
Example 2.5. Let F be a free group, thought of as the fundamental group
of a bouquet of circles R. (This is equivalent to choosing a basis B for F .)
The conjugacy class of a non-trivial element w ∈ F can be represented by
an immersion w ∶ S 1 → R. The mapping cylinder X of this immersion is
naturally a non-positively curved square complex. Let ∗ be the one-point
space and consider the map ∗ → X with image equal to the unique vertex of
R. Then WhX (∗) is the Whitehead graph WhB (w), subdivided once.

                                      12
   More generally, in [16], Cashen and Macura defined generalised Whitehead
graphs WhB (T ){w} associated to a word w in a free group F , for any subtree
T of the Cayley tree R ̃ of F . Our complex WhX (T ) is the graph obtained
from WhB (T ){w} by subdividing once.
   The case when Y is a vertex provides another important example.
Example 2.6. Consider ỹ a vertex of X   ̃ with image y ∈ X. The bounding
hyperplanes of ỹ are dual to the edges incident at y, and a set of such hyper-
planes cross exactly when the edges bound a cube with corner ỹ. Therefore,
WhX (ỹ) ≅ LkX (y) as simplicial complexes.
     Whitehead complexes are useful because they provide a topological model
for the complement of Y : we shall see that WhX (Y ) is homotopy equivalent
to the complement X    ̃ ∖ Y . In order to describe this homotopy equivalence,
it is useful to define the link of Y , and to extend our discussion of bounding
hyperplanes to codimension-k hyperplanes.

Definition 2.7. Consider a set of k distinct hyperplanes H1 , . . . , Hk of Y
that pairwise intersect. The intersection
                                       k
                                  K = ⋂ Hi
                                       i=1

is called a codimension-k hyperplane. It has a closed regular neighbourhood
N (K) ≅ K × [0, 1]k . If the Hi are all bounding hyperplanes of Y then K is
called a bounding codimension-k hyperplane of Y . In this case, we may orient
the interval factors so that

                           N (K) ∩ Y = KY × {0}k

for some convex subcomplex KY , called the bounding codimension-k hyper-
plane component of K in Y .

   The link of KY ×{0}k in KY ×[0, 1]k consists of unit vectors orthogonal to
KY ×{0}k , and is naturally of the form KY ×σK , where σK is a (k−1)-simplex.
   Whenever a codimension-k hyperplane K is contained in a codimension-l
hyperplane L (necessarily with l ≥ k), there are natural inclusions KY ⊆ LY
and σL ⊆ σK , which in turn lead to inclusions

                  KY × σL ⊆ KY × σK , KY × σL ⊆ LY × σL .                  (1)

Gluing along these inclusions defines the link of the subcomplex Y .



                                      13
Definition 2.8. The link of a convex subcomplex Y of a CAT(0) cube com-
     ̃ is the cell complex Lk ̃ (Y ) defined from the disjoint union
plex X                       X

                                ∐ KY × σ K
                                 K

over all bounding hyperplane components of any codimension, by gluing
along the natural inclusions (1). As usual, when X̃ is the universal cover
of a non-positively curved cube complex X, we will write LkX (Y ).
Remark 2.9. The link LkX̃ (Y ) can also be described metrically as the germs
of geodesics in X̃ that are orthogonal to Y . Thus, orthogonal projection
                            ̃ ∖ Y → Lk ̃ (Y ).
defines a natural map π̂Y ∶ X          X
  We can now prove that WhX (Y ) is homotopy equivalent to the comple-
ment of Y in two stages.
Lemma 2.10. For any convex subcomplex Y of a CAT(0) cube complex X,        ̃
                                ̃ ∖ Y → Lk ̃ (Y ) is a homotopy equivalence.
the orthogonal projection π̂Y ∶ X         X

Proof. As in the remark, we identify the link LkX̃ (Y ) with the set of germs
of geodesics orthogonal to Y . Since Y is a subcomplex, every such germ
extends uniquely to a geodesic of length 1. Therefore, π̂Y has a well-defined
                              ̃ ∖ Y sending the germ of γ to γ(1). For any
right-inverse ρ ∶ LkX̃ (Y ) → X
x ∉ Y , let γx denote the unique geodesic from π̂Y (x) to x. Then

                       (x, t) ↦ γx ((1 − t)d(x, Y ) + t)

defines a homotopy equivalence between the identity and ρ ○ π̂Y , which com-
pletes the proof.
   Finally, we relate links to Whitehead complexes by contracting bounding
hyperplane components.
                                                                 ̃
Lemma 2.11. For any convex subcomplex Y of a CAT(0) cube complex X,
there is a homotopy equivalence LkX̃ (Y ) ≃ WhX̃ (Y ).
Proof. The link LkX̃ (Y ) is homeomorphic to the realisation of a complex of
spaces in the sense of Hatcher, with underlying complex the barycentric sub-
division of WhX̃ (Y ). Each vertex corresponds to a codimension-k hyperplane
K, the associated space is the hyperplane component KY , and the attaching
maps are given by the natural inclusions. Since each KY is contractible, it
follows that LkX̃ (Y ) ≃ WhX̃ (Y ) by [33, Proposition 4G.1].
    The previous two lemmas combine to give the following fundamental re-
sult.

                                      14
                                                                 ̃
Lemma 2.12. For any convex subcomplex Y of a CAT(0) cube complex X,
                                ̃ ∖ Y ≃ Wh ̃ (Y ).
there is a homotopy equivalence X         X

The lemma can also be deduced from the nerve theorem, by noting that
WhX̃ (Y ) is the nerve of a natural open cover of X ̃ ∖Y.
    Finally, it will be useful to understand the links of vertices in Whitehead
complexes. (Note that here, in the setting of simplicial complexes, we mean
link in the sense of Definition 1.10.)
                                                                  ̃
Lemma 2.13. Let Y be a convex subcomplex of a CAT(0) cube complex X
and let H be a bounding hyperplane of Y . Then

                            LkWhX̃ (Y ) (H) ≅ WhH (HY ) .

Proof. Since both simplicial complexes are flag, it suffices to define an iso-
morphism at the level of 1-skeleta.
    The vertices of LkWhX̃ (Y ) (H) are, by definition, the bounding hyperplanes
of Y that cross H. For every such hyperplane K, the intersection H ∩ K is
a bounding hyperplane of HY in H. Conversely, every bounding hyper-
plane of HY in H extends uniquely to a bounding hyperplane of Y that
crosses H. Thus, K ↦ H ∩ K defines the required bijection on the 0-skeleta.
The bijection extends to an isomorphism of 1-skeleta, because bounding
codimension-three hyperplanes of Y contained in H (which correspond to
edges of LkWhX̃ (Y ) (H)) are the same thing as bounding codimension-2 hy-
perplanes of HY in H (which correspond to edges of WhH (HY )).

2.2     Ends and splittings
Invoking a famous theorem of Stallings, the number of (Freudenthal) ends of
the universal cover of a non-positively curved cube complex X detects the
free splittings of the fundamental group [58]. (Note that π1 (X) is necessarily
torsion-free.)

Theorem 2.14 (Stallings). Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube
complex.
           ̃ = 0 if and only if π1 (X) is trivial.
  (i) Ends(X)
           ̃ > 1 if and only if π1 (X) splits freely.4
 (ii) Ends(X)
   4
    A non-trivial free splitting corresponds to an action on a simplicial tree without a
global fixed point and with trivial edge stabilisers. Note that Z ≅ 1∗1 splits freely.




                                          15
   We will see that the number of ends can be conveniently encoded in the
connectivity properties of Whitehead graphs. The next result is prototypical,
and deals with the case when X is simply connected.
Proposition 2.15. Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube complex.
There is a compact CAT(0) cube complex Y mapping to X with WhX (Y ) = ∅
if and only if π1 (X) is trivial.
Proof. The Whitehead graph WhX (Y ) is empty if and only if Y = X.̃ Thus
                                       ̃
such a compact Y exists if and only if X is compact, meaning that π1 (X) is
finite, i.e. trivial.
   In §1.2, we saw that is is often convenient to assume that our cube com-
plexes are essential. In fact, when studying free splittings, we will only need
a weaker notion.
Definition 2.16. A CAT(0) cube complex X     ̃ is called freely inessential if
                                             ̃
some (necessarily compact) hyperplane H ⊆ X has the property that one of
                                                  ̃ is called freely essential.
the associated half-spaces is compact. Otherwise, X
Remark 2.17. Any compact CAT(0) cube complex is freely inessential, unless
it is a point, and any essential cube complex is freely essential.
    The next result explains how Whitehead complexes encode free splittings
of the fundamental group.
Proposition 2.18. Let X  ̃ be a freely essential CAT(0) cube complex. There
is a compact, convex Y ⊆ X ̃ such that Wh ̃ (Y ) is non-empty and discon-
                                             X
                      ̃ has more than one end.
nected if and only if X
Proof. Suppose such a Y exists. Since WhX̃ (Y ) is disconnected, Lemma
                  ̃ ∖ Y is also disconnected, so Y separates X
2.12 implies that X                                           ̃ into at least
two components. If one of these components is bounded then any bounding
hyperplane in the corresponding component of WhX̃ (Y ) has a compact half
          ̃ is freely inessential. Otherwise, all components are unbounded
space, so X
   ̃
so X has more than one end.
    For the converse direction, suppose that X ̃ has more than one end, so
there is a compact subcomplex Y ⊆ X    ̃ such that X ̃ ∖ Y has at least two
unbounded components. By Theorem 1.8, we may replace Y by its convex
hull and assume that Y is convex. Since X̃ ∖ Y has at least two components,
so does WhX̃ (Y ) by Lemma 2.12.
    The proposition connects Whitehead complexes and free splittings, but
the resulting criterion is ineffective because there is no bound on the possi-
ble size of a Y for which WhX (Y ) is disconnected. To make the criterion

                                      16
effective, we need to understand how to build up Whitehead complexes in-
ductively by gluing, generalising the splicing construction of Manning [42]
used by Cashen–Macura [16].

2.3    Connected sums of simplicial complexes
The definition of the connected sum of two simplicial complexes is directly
analogous to the definition for manifolds.

Definition 2.19 (Connected sum of complexes). Let A, B be simplicial com-
plexes, let a ∈ A, b ∈ B be vertices, and let ϕ ∶ LkA (a) → LkB (b) be an
isomorphism. The complex

                             A#ϕ B ∶= Aa ∪ϕ Bb

is the connected sum of A to B along ϕ. (Often, we will have a natural
identification v = a = b, and ϕ will be implicit. In this case, we may write
A#v B instead.)

Remark 2.20. Definition 2.19 generalises the splicing construction used by
Manning to analyse Whitehead graphs in finite-index subgroups [42], and
exploited further by Cashen and Macura [15, 16]. Up to taking first subdivi-
sions, Manning’s definition coincides with Definition 2.19 when restricted to
graphs. (Recall from Example 2.5 that the classical Whitehead graph is the
first subdivision of our Whitehead complex.)
   The next result explains how cutting Y along a hyperplane decomposes
the Whitehead complex as a connected sum. When a convex subcomplex
Y ⊆X̃ intersects a hyperplane H of X,
                                   ̃ we will abuse notation by identifying
H with H ∩ Y . Cutting Y along H then leads to the decomposition

                               Y = Y1 ∪H Y2 ;

note that H is then a bounding hyperplane of both Y1 and Y2 .

Proposition 2.21 (Cutting and connected sum). Let Y be a convex sub-
                                 ̃ If
complex of a CAT(0) cube complex X.

                                Y = Y1 ∪H Y2
                         ̃ then
for some hyperplane H of X

                    WhX (Y ) ≅ WhX (Y1 )#H WhX (Y2 ) .


                                     17
Proof. For notational convenience, write Wi = WhX (Yi ) for i = 1, 2, and W =
WhX (Y ). Our first task is to define the isomorphism LkW1 (H) ≅ LkW2 (H)
needed to define the connected sum.
   A (k − 1)-simplex σK of Wi corresponds to a bounding codimension-k
hyperplane K of Yi . This simplex σK is contained in LkWi (H) exactly when
K crosses H. A codimension-k hyperplane that crosses H bounds Y1 if
and only it bounds Y2 , so LkW1 (H) is naturally identified with LkW2 (H) as
required. Let L denote the natural copy of LkW1 (H) ≡ LkW2 (H) in W1 #H W2 .
   To see that W ≅ W1 #H W2 , note that the (k − 1)-simplices of W1 #H W2
correspond bijectively to bounding codimension-k hyperplanes of Y . Indeed,
the simplices of W1 #H W2 are of three kinds:
 (i) simplices σK in L correspond to bounding codimension-k hyperplanes
     of Y that cross H;

 (ii) simplices σK of W1 that are not adjacent to H correspond to bounding
      codimension-k hyperplanes of Y1 disjoint from H;

(iii) simplices σK of W2 that are not adjacent to H correspond to bounding
      codimension-k hyperplanes of Y2 disjoint from H.
Since this list also covers all the codimension-k hyperplanes of Y , and inclu-
sions are preserved, the result follows.

2.4    Cut-set lemmas in connected sums
To understand splittings of fundamental groups of non-positively curved cube
complexes, the key idea is to combine Proposition 2.21 with an understand-
ing of how the connectivity properties of simplicial complexes, in the sense of
Definition 1.11, change under connected sum. The first lemma is prototypi-
cal. Let b0 (X) denote the 0th Betti number of a space X, i.e. the number of
connected components.
Lemma 2.22. Suppose that A and B are simplicial complexes. Then

                             b0 (A#v B) = b0 (B)

unless v is a cut vertex of A.
Proof. We work with reduced homology. Let L denote the link of v and C(L)
the cone on L. Then B = Bv ∪L C(L) so, because C(L) is contractible, the
Mayer–Vietoris theorem gives that

                       H̃0 (L) → H̃0 (Bv ) → H̃0 (B) → 0

                                      18
is exact. The connected sum can be written as A#v B = Av ∪L Bv , so the
Mayer–Vietoris theorem also gives that
                H̃0 (L) → H̃0 (Av ) ⊕ H̃0 (Bv ) → H̃0 (A#v B) → 0
is exact. Unless v is a cut vertex in A, H̃0 (Av ) is trivial, so the two sequences
combine to show that
               H̃0 (A#v B) ≅ coker(H̃0 (L) → H̃0 (Bv )) ≅ H̃0 (B)
as required.
    We will usually only apply the lemma when B is connected, in which case
it takes the following form.
Lemma 2.23. Suppose that A and B are simplicial complexes. If B is
connected but A#v B is disconnected, then v is a cut vertex in A.
   Since we will need to apply Lemma 2.23 inductively, we also need to
understand when cut vertices can arise, and more generally cut simplices.
Lemma 2.24. Suppose that A and B are connected and a simplex σ of A is
a cut simplex of A#v B. Then one of the following holds:
 (i) v is a cut vertex in B;
 (ii) σ is a cut simplex in either A or B; or
(iii) σ is contained in the link of v, and the simplex τ = ⟨σ, v⟩ spanned by σ
      and v together is a cut simplex in both A and B.
In particular, if A#v B has a cut simplex then either A or B has a cut simplex.
Proof. Let C = A#v B for notational convenience. The hypothesis that σ is
a cut simplex of C means that Cσ is disconnected. The proof now divides
into cases, according to whether σ is in A but not in B, or σ is contained in
the canonical copy of the link of v.
    In the first case, when σ is in A but not in B, we have
                                  Cσ = Aσ #v B ,
so Lemma 2.23 implies that v is a cut vertex in B, as in item (i), or Aσ is
disconnected, i.e. σ is a cut simplex in A.
    In the second case, if σ is in the link of v then
                                 Cσ = Aσ #v Bσ ,
so Lemma 2.23 leads to two further subcases: either one of Aσ or Bσ is
disconnected, or v is a cut vertex in both Aσ and Bσ . The former corresponds
to item (ii), while the latter case gives item (iii).

                                        19
  The above results will help us to understand free splittings of π1 (X).
More generally, we will need to understand how arbitrary cut sets decompose.
Lemma 2.25. Suppose that U is a full set of vertices of A and V is a full
set of vertices of B, both non-adjacent to a common vertex v. If U ∪ V is a
cut set of A#v B then: either
 (i) V is a cut set in B; or
 (ii) U ∪ {v} is a cut set in A.
Proof. Again, let C = A#v B for notational convenience. Because v is adja-
cent to neither U nor V ,
                            CU ∪V = AU #v BV
which is disconnected by hypothesis. Therefore, by Lemma 2.23, either BV is
disconnected, giving item (i), or v is a cut vertex in AU , giving item (ii).

2.5    Cuts and the generalised Whitehead’s lemma
   In this section, we combine the results developed so far to prove a sufficient
condition for the fundamental group of a compact, non-positively curved cube
complex X to be one-ended. These conditions are phrased in terms of k-cuts.
Definition 2.26 (k-cuts). Consider a finite CAT(0) cube complex Y equipped
with an immersion Y → X. If WhX (Y ) has a finite cut set then Y is said
to be a cut. More precisely, if WhX (Y ) is (k − 1)-vertex-connected but not
k-vertex-connected – i.e. if the smallest cut set for WhX (Y ) has cardinality
k – then Y is said to be a k-cut. If {H1 , . . . , Hk } is a minimal cut set for a
k-cut Y then we say that Y is a cut between H1 , . . . , Hk .
   Our analysis of splittings of fundamental groups of non-positively curved
cube complexes will rest on understanding cuts. We start with 0-cuts, which
characterise free splittings. The results of §2.4 explain how 0-cuts decompose.
Lemma 2.27. Consider a finite CAT(0) cube complex Y equipped with a
locally isometric immersion Y → X, and let Y = Y1 ∪H Y2 for some hyperplane
H of Y . If Y is a 0-cut then either one of Y1 or Y2 is a 0-cut, or both Y1
and Y2 are 1-cuts.
Proof. The immersion lifts to an embedding of Y as a convex subcomplex of
                    ̃ and the hyperplane H of Y then extends uniquely to
the universal cover X,
                 ̃
a hyperplane of X, still denoted by H. Proposition 2.21 implies that
                     WhX (Y ) ≅ WhX (Y1 )#H WhX (Y2 ) ,
so the result follows from Lemma 2.23.

                                       20
   To iterate the argument, we also need to analyse cut simplices.
Lemma 2.28. Consider a finite CAT(0) cube complex equipped with a locally
isometric immersion Y → X, and let Y = Y1 ∪H Y2 for some hyperplane H of
Y . If WhX (Y ) has a cut simplex, then one of WhX (Y1 ) or WhX (Y2 ) has a
cut simplex.
Proof. This follows in the same way as Lemma 2.27, using Proposition 2.21
and Lemma 2.24.
    We now have all the tools needed to prove Theorem E, which we think of
as a version of Whitehead’s lemma for non-positively curved cube complexes.
Proof of Theorem E. Let Y be a CAT(0) cube complex, locally isometrically
immersed in X. We prove that WhX (Y ) is connected without cut simplices,
by induction on the number of vertices of Y .
    In the base case, Y is a single vertex y, so WhX (Y ) ≅ LkX (y) by Example
2.6 and there is nothing to prove. If Y has more than one vertex, we may
choose a (necessarily separating) hyperplane H of Y and write Y = Y1 ∪H Y2 .
By the inductive hypothesis, both WhX (Y1 ) and WhX (Y2 ) are connected
without cut simplices, and therefore so is WhX (Y ) by Lemma 2.28.
    In conclusion, X has no 0-cuts, so Proposition 2.18 implies that π1 (X)
has at most one end.
    Theorem E provides a convenient certificate that π1 (X) does not split
freely. However, the sufficient condition that it provides is not necessary.
Example 2.29. Let X0 be the standard 2-torus, seen as a non-positively
curved square complex with a single vertex x0 . Let X = X0 ∨x0 I, where
I is a unit interval. The link LkX (x0 ) is the disjoint union of a 4-cycle and
a point, and in particular is disconnected. However, X   ̃ is clearly one-ended.
    Examples like 2.29 can be handled by collapsing free edges and free faces.
(Free faces manifest themselves as vertices of valence 1 in the link of a ver-
tex.) However, there are also non-positively curved square complexes X, with
X̃ one-ended, in which the link of a vertex is connected without valence-1
vertices, but contains a cut vertex.
    The following example is based on [36, Example 2.1].
Example 2.30. Consider the rank-two free group F = ⟨a, b⟩, thought of as the
fundamental group of the wedge of two circles Γ = S 1 ∨ S 1 . Consider the
element w = abab2 ab3 of F and realise the corresponding cyclic word by an
immersion of a circle γ ∶ S 1 → Γ. Let X be the non-positively curved square
complex obtained by gluing either end of a cylinder S 1 × [0, 1] to two copies
of Γ, using γ as the attaching map at each end. The links of the two vertices

                                      21
of X are both isomorphic to the first subdivision of the Whitehead graph of
w, which is connected, without valence-1 vertices, but has a cut vertex.
   The fundamental group of X is the double
                                 π1 (X) = F ∗⟨w⟩ F
by the Seifert–van Kampen theorem. Applying the automorphism ϕ of F2
setting ϕ(a) = ab−2 and ϕ(b) = b sends w ↦ w′ = ab−1 a2 b. We may realise w′
by an immersion γ ′ ∶ S 1 → Γ and glue along a cylinder as before to obtain a
new square complex X ′ with π1 (X ′ ) ≅ π1 (X). However, the links of the two
vertices of X ′ are isomorphic to the first subdivision of the Whitehead graph
of w′ , which consists of two triangles glued along an edge, and in particular
is connected with no cut vertices. Therefore, by Theorem E, π(X) ≅ π1 (X ′ )
is one-ended, even though the links of X have cut vertices.
    In the two-dimensional case, a square complex X can always be modified
so that the sufficient condition of Theorem E can be applied. A map of
square complexes ϕ ∶ X ′ → X is called an unfolding of X if (i) the restriction
of ϕ to 1-skeleta is a combinatorial homotopy equivalence of graphs; and (ii)
ϕ is a homeomorphism on the complements of the 1-skeleta.
Proposition 2.31. Let X be a compact, non-positively curved square com-
plex. There is an unfolding ϕ ∶ X ′ → X such that
                     X ′ = Γ ∨ X 1 ∨ . . . ∨ Xm ∨ S 1 ∨ . . . ∨ S n
is also a compact, non-positively curved square complex and, furthermore:
 (i) Γ is a graph;
 (ii) each Xi has the property that every link is connected without cut vertices
      or cut edges;
(iii) each Sj is a square.
Proof. The existence of X ′ is [66, Lemma 4.6] stated for square complexes
(see also [39, §3]). The idea of the proof is an algorithmic unfolding procedure:
one simply unfolds an edge of the 1-skeleton whenever the link of a vertex
contains a cut vertex.
    It remains to prove that X ′ is non-positively curved. To do this, it suffices
to check Gromov’s link condition, that any cycle γ in a link of a vertex of
X ′ should have length at least 2π in the angular metric [10, Lemma II.5.6].
Because ϕ is a homeomorphism on the complement of the 1-skeleton, the
induced maps on links are injective on edges and hence immersions. Thus,
γ is also an immersed cycle in a link of X, so has length at least 2π by the
link condition for X.

                                          22
   The square complexes Xi provided by the proposition satisfy the hy-
potheses of Theorem E. Thus, the wedge decomposition X ′ actually gives
the Grushko decomposition of X:

                   π1 (X) ≅ π1 (Γ) ∗ π1 (X1 ) ∗ . . . ∗ π1 (Xm ) ,

and each π1 (Xi ) is non-trivial and freely indecomposable. Since the proof of
Proposition 2.31 is algorithmic, Theorem E and the proposition together pro-
vide an effective, geometric method to determine the Grushko decomposition
of the fundamental group of a non-positively curved square complex.

2.6    Shepherd’s theorem and 1-cuts
The results of §2.5 show that 0-cuts detect when an essential cube complex
has more than one end, but they also illustrate the fact that the existence of
1-cuts makes it difficult to determine whether or not π1 (X) splits. Therefore,
for one-ended π1 (X), we would like to be able to choose X to have no 1-cuts.
In the 2-dimensional case, this can be done by unfolding the 1-skeleton as in
Proposition 2.31. To handle the general case, however, we can use a recent
deep theorem of Shepherd.
    A quarter-space of a CAT(0) cube complex is the intersection of two trans-
verse half-spaces. A quarter-space is said to be deep if it is not contained in
a bounded neighbourhood of the intersection of its two defining hyperplanes.
The next result is [55, Theorem 1.5].

Theorem 2.32 (Shepherd’s theorem). If G is one-ended and the fundamen-
tal group of a non-positively curved cube complex, then G = π1 (X) for an
essential non-positively curved cube complex X, such that the universal cover
X̃ has the property that all half-spaces of X
                                            ̃ are one-ended and all quarter-
spaces are deep.

   The following lemma connects Shepherd’s theorem to 1-cuts.

Lemma 2.33. Let X    ̃ be a one-ended, essential CAT(0) cube complex in
                                      ̃ has a 1-cut, then some half-space of
which all quarter-spaces are deep. If X
̃
X has more than one end.

Proof. Let Y ⊆ X̃ be a 1-cut, i.e. Y is compact and convex and Wh ̃ (Y ) has
                                                                    X
a cut vertex H. Let U be the half-space of H that contains Y .
    We claim that U is freely essential. Indeed, suppose that some hyperplane
K of U had a compact half-space V . If K were disjoint from H then K would
also be a compact hyperplane in X,  ̃ contradicting the hypothesis that X̃ is


                                         23
essential and one-ended. If K crossed H then V would be a compact quarter-
          ̃ contradicting the hypothesis that all quarter-spaces are deep.
space in X,
    Now, WhU (Y ) is obtained from WhX̃ (Y ) by deleting the star of H, so is
disconnected. Therefore, U has more than one end by Proposition 2.18, as
required.
   Combining Shepherd’s theorem with the lemma, we may always assume
that one-ended cube complexes have no 1-cuts.

Corollary 2.34. If G is the fundamental group of a compact, non-positively
curved cube complex and G is one-ended, then G = π1 (X), where X is a
compact, essential, non-positively curved cube complex without 0-cuts or 1-
cuts.


3     Cyclic splittings
Having understood the free splittings of π1 (X), we may henceforth assume
that π1 (X) is one-ended. Our next task is to adapt the analysis of the
previous section to understand splittings of π1 (X) over Z. We restrict at-
tention to the case where π1 (X) is hyperbolic and, for brevity, we will say
hyperbolic cube complex to mean a compact, connected, non-positively curved
cube complex X with X   ̃ (and hence π1 (X)) Gromov-hyperbolic. Let δ be a
hyperbolicity constant for X.̃
    Cashen–Macura studied line patterns in free groups, i.e. relatively hyper-
bolic structures on free groups with cyclic parabolics [16]. They explained
how to recognise cut pairs in Otal’s decomposition space – i.e. the Bowditch
boundary – by analysing cut pairs in generalised Whitehead graphs. Cashen
went on to use this analysis to recognise relative cyclic splittings [15]. Barrett
used similar ideas to describe an algorithm that computes the Bowditch JSJ
decomposition of any hyperbolic group [2].
    Our first task is to adapt their ideas to the setting of hyperbolic cube
complexes.

3.1    Periodic 2-cuts
Suppose that π1 (X) is one-ended. If every splitting of π1 (X) with cyclic
edge groups is trivial, then π1 (X) is said to be cyclically indecomposable.
The main theorem of this section is a combinatorial characterisation of cyclic
indecomposibility. Just as we understood free splittings of π1 (X) in terms of
0-cuts and 1-cuts of X, so cyclic splittings can be understood using 2-cuts.


                                       24
    As we will see, cyclic splittings give rise to 2-cuts, but the converse is not
quite true: in order to construct a cyclic splitting from a 2-cut, we also need
to consider the combinatorial types of the bounding hyperplane components.
Definition 3.1 (Abstract hyperplane component). Let X be a compact,
non-positively curved cube complex. An abstract hyperplane component over
X consists of the following data:
                                                        ̃
 (i) a compact, convex subcomplex K of a hyperplane H ⊆ X;
 (ii) a non-trivial class cK in the reduced 0-cohomology H̃ 0 (WhH (K); Z/2Z).
Two abstract hyperplane components K ⊆ H and K ′ ⊆ H ′ are of isomorphic
type if there is a deck transformation ϕ ∈ π1 (X) such that ϕ(K) = K ′ , in-
ducing an isomorphism WhH (K) ≅ WhH ′ (K ′ ) under which cK ′ pulls back to
cK .
     An orientation of an abstract hyperplane component consists of the fol-
lowing extra datum:
(iii) a choice of one of the two half spaces of the hyperplane H.
Two oriented abstract hyperplane components K ⊆ H and K ′ ⊆ H ′ are of op-
posite type if they are of isomorphic type and, furthermore, the isomorphism
ϕ can be chosen to reverse the chosen orientations.
   The reader may find it useful to think of the class cK as a non-trivial
partition of the connected components of WhH (K).
   This definition enables us to define a periodic 2-cut.
Definition 3.2 (Periodic 2-cut). Let X be a compact, non-positively curved
cube complex without 0- or 1-cuts. Consider a 2-cut Y in X between disjoint
hyperplanes H, H ′ . Fix a non-trivial class cY ∈ H̃ 0 (WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ; Z/2Z).
Define an oriented abstract hyperplane component corresponding to H as
follows:
 (i) K = HY ;
 (ii) set cK to be the pullback of cY under the inclusion of WhH (K) ≅
      LkWhX (Y ) (H) into WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ;
(iii) the orientation is determined by the half-space of H that contains Y .
Define an oriented abstract hyperplane component K ′ corresponding to H ′ in
the same way. The 2-cut Y is said to be periodic if the two oriented abstract
hyperplane components are of opposite type, for some choice of cY . In this
case, the element ϕ ∈ π1 (X) sending H → H ′ is called the associated covering
transformation of Y .

                                       25
Remark 3.3. Since X has no 1-cuts, WhX (Y ){H ′ } is connected. The Mayer–
Vietoris sequence applied to the decomposition

               WhX (Y ){H ′ } = WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ∪Lk(H) C(Lk(H))

then implies that the natural map

              H̃ 0 (WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ; Z/2Z) → H̃ 0 (WhH (K); Z/2Z)

is injective, so cK is indeed non-trivial, as required.
    We shall see that periodic 2-cuts characterise cyclic splittings. However,
first we need to relate cyclic splittings to Whitehead complexes.
Lemma 3.4. Let X be an essential hyperbolic cube complex with π1 (X) one-
ended. Then π1 (X) splits over Z if and only if some infinite cyclic subgroup
acts cocompactly on some isometrically embedded subcomplex Z    ̃ of X ̃ with
       ̃
WhX (Z) disconnected.
Proof. By the algebraic annulus theorem of Dunwoody–Swenson [21], and
noting that π1 (X) is torsion-free, π1 (X) splits over a Z subgroup if and only
if some subgroup C ≅ Z satisfies that the number of relative ends e(G, C) > 1.
Because π1 (X) is hyperbolic, C is quasiconvex.
     Choosing a base vertex ∗ in X, ̃ the condition that e(G, C) > 1 implies
that, for some R, the R-neighbourhood of the orbit C∗ separates X        ̃ into
at least two infinite components. Let Z   ̃ be the cubical convex hull of the
R-neighbourhood of C∗, which still separates X      ̃ into at least two infinite
components. By Haglund’s theorem (Theorem 1.8), C acts cocompactly on
 ̃ Because Z
Z.            ̃ separates X ̃ into two components, WhX (Z)   ̃ is disconnected
by Lemma 2.12, as required.
     Conversely, suppose that some C ≅ Z acts cocompactly on some convex
subcomplex Z  ̃ with WhX (Z) ̃ disconnected, so Z  ̃ separates X
                                                               ̃ into two com-
ponents by Lemma 2.12. Either some complementary component remains
within a bounded distance of Z, ̃ in which case some bounding hyperplane of
Z̃ is inessential, which is a contradiction, or all complementary components
are unbounded away from Z,    ̃ meaning that e(G, C) > 1, as required.

   In the setting of Lemma 3.4, it will be useful to know that the number of
path components of the, a priori infinite, complex WhX (Z) ̃ is finite.

Lemma 3.5. Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube complex without
0- or 1-cuts. Suppose that some infinite cyclic subgroup ⟨ϕ⟩ of π1 (X) acts
cocompactly on some isometrically embedded subcomplex Z  ̃ of X.
                                                              ̃ Then the
                                    ̃
number of path components of WhX (Z) is finite.

                                       26
Proof. The compact quotient Z = ⟨ϕ⟩/Z    ̃ has fundamental group Z ≅ ⟨ϕ⟩,
and therefore H (Z; Z) ≅ Z. Since the first cohomology is generated by
                 1

cocycles dual to hyperplanes, some hyperplane K of Z is crossed by any loop
representing the generator ϕ of Z. Since π1 (K) is contained in the kernel of
the dual map
                               Z ≅ π1 (Z) → Z ,
it follows that K is simply connected, so K lifts to a hyperplane (still denoted
by K) of Z.̃ By [14, Lemma 2.3], after replacing ϕ by a further proper power
we may assume that ϕ(K) is disjoint from K.
     The hyperplane K of Z ̃ extends to some hyperplane H of X.  ̃ Cutting Z   ̃
along the ⟨ϕ⟩-orbit of H decomposes it as an infinite gluing:
               ̃ = ⋯ ∪ϕ−1 (H) ϕ−1 (Y ) ∪H Y ∪ϕ(H) ϕ(Y ) ∪ϕ2 (H) ⋯
               Z

                                                        ̃ along H and
where Y is the compact component resulting from cutting Z
ϕ(H). It follows from this that the Whitehead complex WhX (Z)̃ can be
written as an ascending union
                           ̃ = ⋃ WhX (Zn ){ϕ−n (H),ϕn (H)}
                      WhX (Z)
                                   n≥0

where
                    Zn = ϕ−n (Y ) ∪ϕ1−n (H) ⋯ ∪ϕn−1 (H) ϕn−1 (Y ) .
   In particular,

               WhX (Zn ) = WhX (Y )#WhX (Zn−1 )#WhX (Y )

by Proposition 2.21. Since X has no 0- or 1-cuts, WhX (Y ) is 1-vertex-
connected, so

              b0 (WhX (Zn )) = b0 (WhX (Zn−1 )) = b0 (WhX (Z0 ))

by Lemma 2.22 and induction.
   Recall that K = H ∩ Z  ̃ = HY . Let L = WhH (K) ≅ LkWh (Y ) (H) (by
                                                              X
Lemma 2.13), which is itself compact. Mayer–Vietoris applied to the decom-
position

            WhX (Zn ) = C(L) ∪L WhX (Zn ){ϕ−n (H),ϕn (H)} ∪L C(L)

(where, as usual, C(L) denotes the cone on L) gives the exact sequence

   H0 (L) ⊕ H0 (L) → H0 (WhX (Zn ){ϕ−n (H),ϕn (H)} ) → H0 (WhX (Zn )) → 0 .


                                          27
Thus, the number of connected components is bounded independently of n:

          b0 (WhX (Zn ){ϕ−n (H),ϕn (H)} ) ≤ b0 (WhX (Zn )) + 2b0 (L)
                                          = b0 (WhX (Z0 )) + 2b0 (L) .
                                ̃ has finitely many connected components,
From this, it follows that WhX (Z)
as required.
    It follows from Lemmas 3.4 and 3.5 that periodic 2-cuts characterise cyclic
splittings.
Theorem 3.6 (Cyclic splittings and periodic 2-cuts). Let X be an essential
hyperbolic cube complex. Suppose that π1 (X) is one-ended, and suppose fur-
thermore that X has no 0- or 1-cuts. Then π1 (X) is cyclically decomposable
if and only if there is a periodic 2-cut Y → X.
Proof. By Lemma 3.4, π1 (X) is cyclically decomposable if and only if there
is a convex Z-periodic subcomplex Z ̃⊆X  ̃ that separates X.
                                                          ̃ By Lemma 2.12,
 ̃           ̃                       ̃
Z separates X if and only if WhX (Z) is disconnected.
    Suppose that there is a periodic 2-cut Y ⊆ X̃ between hyperplanes H, H ′ .
By definition, H, H define a cut pair in WhX (Y ), and the corresponding
                    ′

oriented abstract hyperplane components have opposite type. Therefore, we
may define the amalgamated subcomplex

                                Y ∪ϕ(H) ϕ(Y ) .
                                            ̃ to be the infinite amalgamation
Iterating using all powers of ϕ, we may set Z

                ⋯ ∪ϕ−1 (H) ϕ−1 (Y ) ∪H Y ∪ϕ(H) ϕ(Y ) ∪ϕ2 (H) ⋯ ,

which is ⟨ϕ⟩-invariant and cocompact. By Proposition 2.21, WhX (Z)   ̃ is
constructed by iteratively taking connect sums of copies of WhX (Y ) along
copies of H, meaning that WhX (Z) ̃ is the infinite union

      ⋯ ∪L WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ∪L WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ∪L WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ∪L ⋯ ,

where L = LkWhX (Y ) (H) ≅ WhH (HY ) by Lemma 2.13. The Mayer–Vietoris
sequence for reduced cohomology (with coefficients in Z/2Z) asserts that
                        ̃ → ∏ H̃ 0 (WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ) → ∏ H̃ 0 (L)
         0 → H̃ 0 (WhX (Z))
                                n∈Z                           n∈Z

is exact. The right-hand map sends the non-trivial element

                      (cY )n∈Z ∈ ∏ H̃ 0 (WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } )
                                n∈Z


                                       28
                                           ̃ is non-trivial, and WhX (Z)
to (cK ) − (ϕ∗ (cK ′ )) = 0, so H̃ 0 (WhX (Z))                         ̃ is
indeed disconnected as required.
    Conversely, suppose that there is a convex Z-periodic subcomplex Z̃⊆X  ̃
with WhX (Z)  ̃ disconnected, with the infinite cyclic subgroup Z generated
by some covering transformation ϕ. By Lemma 3.5, H̃ 0 (WhX (Z);  ̃ Z/2Z) is
finite so, after replacing ϕ by a power, we may assume that it acts trivially
                ̃ Z/2Z). As in the proof of Lemma 3.5, Z
on H̃ 0 (WhX (Z);                                           ̃ has a compact
hyperplane K that separates the two ends, and extends to a hyperplane H
    ̃ After replacing ϕ by a proper power, we may assume that ϕ(H) is
of X.
disjoint from H.
    Let Z̃± be the two half-spaces of H, so

                                ̃=Z
                                Z ̃− ∪H Z
                                        ̃+ .

We claim that WhX (Z̃+ ) and WhX (Z ̃− ) are connected. Indeed, let Y be the
compact component of Z̃ that results from cutting along H and ϕ(H). Then
̃
Z+ may be written as the ascending union of compact, convex subcomplexes
Yn where
              Yn = Y ∪ϕ(H) ϕ(Y ) ∪ϕ2 (H) . . . ∪ϕn−1 (H) ϕn−1 (Y )
and, correspondingly, the Whitehead complex of Z ̃+ may be written as an
ascending union
                           ̃+ ) = ⋃ WhX (Yn )ϕn (H) .
                      WhX (Z
                                    n≥1

Thus, if WhX (Z ̃+ ) were disconnected then it would follow that WhX (Yn )ϕn (H)
was disconnected for some n. If so then Yn would be a 1-cut in X, contra-
dicting the assumption. Thus, WhX (Z     ̃+ ) is connected and, symmetrically,
so is WhX (Z̃− ). Since

                          ̃ = WhX (Z
                     WhX (Z)       ̃− )#H WhX (Z
                                               ̃+ )

is disconnected, it follows that H is a cut vertex in both WhX (Z    ̃− ) and
WhX (Z ̃+ ) by Lemma 2.23.
    Now, H ′ = ϕ(H) is a hyperplane of Z̃+ disjoint from H, and cutting along
H ′ decomposes Z ̃+ as
                               ̃+ = Y ∪H ′ ϕ(Z
                               Z             ̃+ )

where Y = Z ̃+ ∩ ϕ(Z
                   ̃− ); note that H is a bounding hyperplane of Y . Hence,

                        ̃+ ) = WhX (Y )#H ′ WhX (ϕ(Z
                   WhX (Z                          ̃+ ))

                                       ̃+ )) ≅ WhX (Z
and so, since we saw above that WhX (ϕ(Z            ̃+ ) is connected, Y
is a 2-cut between H and H by Lemma 2.25.
                           ′



                                      29
   Finally, note that Y is a periodic 2-cut. Indeed, setting H ′ = ϕ(H), it
only remains to construct a suitable cY ∈ H̃ 0 (WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ) that satisfies
Definition 3.2. To do this, as above we consider the exact sequence
                         ̃ →
          0 → H̃ 0 (WhX (Z))
                             α                            β
                               ∏ H̃ 0 (WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } ) → ∏ H̃ 0 (L)
                                  n∈Z                         n∈Z

provided by Mayer–Vietoris, where L = WhH (K). Note that Z ≅ ⟨ϕ∗ ⟩ acts
on all terms in the exact sequence, and the maps α and β are Z-equivariant.
    Since WhX (Z)̃ is disconnected, there is some non-zero a ∈ H̃ 0 (WhX (Z)),
                                                                             ̃
and α(a) = (bn )n∈Z is also non-zero because α is injective. But ϕ∗ acts trivially
               ̃
on H̃ 0 (WhX (Z)),  so ϕ∗ (a) = a, and (bn )n∈Z is actually a non-zero constant
sequence (b). Set cY = b.
    Write i for the inclusion of L into WhX (Y ){H,H ′ } and j for the inclusion
of L into WhX (ϕ−1 (Y )){ϕ−1 (H),H} . Then
                           β(b) = (i∗ (b) − ϕ∗ ○ j ∗ (b)) ,
so i∗ (b) = ϕ∗ (j ∗ (b)) by exactness. Therefore, setting cK = i∗ (b) and cK ′ =
j ∗ (b), we have cK = ϕ∗ (cK ′ ) as required.

3.2    A bound on the widths of 2-cuts
Although Theorem 3.6 provides a useful characterisation of the existence of
cyclic splittings, in order to make it effective we need an a priori bound on
the complexity of the 2-cuts that arise. Such a bound is the main result of
this section, and is proved in Theorem 3.13 below. It is phrased in terms of
the width of a 2-cut.
Definition 3.7 (Width of a k-cut). Let X be a compact, non-positively
curved cube complex, and consider a k-cut Y → X between bounding hy-
perplanes {H1 , . . . , Hk } for k ≥ 2. The width of Y is the shortest ℓ2 -distance
between any distinct Hi and Hj .
   The next lemma provides some geometric control on cuts, assuming that
there are no 1-cuts.
Lemma 3.8. Let X      ̃ be a one-ended a CAT(0) cube complex without 0- or
1-cuts. Consider a k-cut Y between bounding hyperplanes H1 , . . . , Hk . Then
Y ∩ Hull (⋃ki=1 Hi ) is also a k-cut between H1 , . . . , Hk .
Proof. Let K1 , . . . Kl be the hyperplanes of Y that have a half-space Uj such
that Hi ⊆ Uj for all i. Write Yn = Y ∩ ⋂nj=1 Uj for each 0 ≤ n ≤ l. Note that
                                               k
                             Yl = Y ∩ Hull (⋃ Hi ) .
                                              i=1


                                         30
To prove the lemma, we show by induction on n that each Yn is a k-cut.
   In the base case, Y0 = Y and there is nothing to prove. For the inductive
step, let n ≥ 1. If Kn is disjoint from Yn−1 then Yn−1 = Yn and there is, again,
nothing to prove. Otherwise, Kn decomposes Yn−1 as

                                 Yn−1 = Yn ∪Kn Yn′

where Yn = Yn−1 ∩Un . Then H1 , . . . , Hk all bound Yn and not Yn′ (since they are
disjoint from Kn , and Kn cannot separate Y from any Hi ). By Proposition
2.21
                         WhX (Yn−1 ) ≅ WhX (Yn )#Kn WhX (Yn′ ) ,
and Kn is not a cut vertex in WhX (Yn′ ) because X      ̃ has no 1-cuts. Therefore
{H1 , . . . , Hk } is a cut set in WhX (Yn ) by Lemma 2.25, so Yn is also a k-cut
between H1 , . . . , Hk . Taking n = l, the result follows.
    We now turn our attention to some CAT(0) geometry of hyperplanes.
Consider a 2-cut Y between hyperplanes H1 and H2 , and let γ be an ℓ2 -
geodesic between H1 and H2 . In order to prove the desired bound, we need
to find long chains of mutually disjoint hyperplanes that cross γ at an angle
that isn’t too acute. A hyperplane K is said to be ϵ-almost orthogonal to γ
if γ crosses K at an angle of at least ϵ.
    The next lemma shows that many of the hyperplanes crossed by γ will
be almost orthogonal, for a suitable value of ϵ. The proof uses elementary
Euclidean trigonometry.

Lemma 3.9. Let d ≥ 2, and let γ be an ℓ2 -geodesic in a d-dimensional
CAT(0) cube complex X.    ̃ Suppose that γ crosses two hyperplanes K1 and
K2 consecutively. Then at least one of K1 and K2 is ϵd -almost orthogonal to
γ, where ϵd = tan−1 ( 2√1d−1 ).

Proof. If γ crosses K1 and K2 simultaneously then the result is immediate,
because K1 and K2 are orthogonal to each other and ϵd < π/4.
    Otherwise, suppose that γ(0) ∈ K1 and γ crosses K1 at an angle θ < ϵd .
Because the (closed) regular neighbourhood N (K1 ) of K1 is isometric to
K1 × [−1/2, 1/2], we have γ(t) ∈ N (K1 ) whenever ∣t∣ sin θ ≤ 1/2. In particular,
if γ(t0 ) is in the boundary of N (K1 ) then ∣t0 ∣ = 1/(2 sin θ). Let p be the
orthogonal projection of γ(t0 ) to K1 . The three points γ(0), γ(t0 ), p together
form a right-angled Euclidean triangle, so
                                                      1
                         d(γ(0), p) = ∣t0 ∣ cos θ =     cot θ .
                                                      2


                                         31
Because θ < ϵd , it follows that
                                         1         √
                         d(γ(0), p) >      cot ϵd = d − 1
                                         2
which implies that γ(0) and p are separated by a hyperplane in the (d − 1)-
dimensional cube complex K1 . Since every such hyperplane extends uniquely
to a hyperplane in X ̃ orthogonal to K1 , it follows that γ crosses a hyperplane
in N (K1 ) orthogonal to K1 .
    The first such hyperplane is by assumption K2 . Let γ(t1 ) ∈ K2 and let
q be the orthogonal projection of γ(0) to K2 . Then the three points γ(0),
γ(t1 ), q together span a right-angled Euclidean triangle, whence γ makes an
angle
                           π/2 − θ > π − ϵd > π/4 > ϵd
with K2 , as required.
    The next lemma guarantees that a sufficiently distant pair of hyperplanes
will be separated by many mutually disjoint hyperplanes, all themselves al-
most orthogonal to a geodesic.
Lemma 3.10. Let H1 and H2 be hyperplanes in a d-dimensional CAT(0)
cube complex X,̃ and let γ be a shortest ℓ2 -geodesic between them. For every
n there is a C such that, if the length of γ is greater than C, then there exists
a sequence of mutually disjoint hyperplanes
                                    K1 , . . . , K n
that each separate H1 from H2 , all of which are ϵd -almost orthogonal to γ.
Proof. Let N be the Ramsey number R(n, d + 1). Recall that the ℓ1 distance
between H1 and H2 is equal to the number of hyperplanes crossed by γ. Since
the ℓ1 and ℓ2 metrics are quasi-isometric, there is a C such that, if γ has ℓ2
length at least C, then it crosses at least 2N hyperplanes. By Lemma 3.9,
at least N of these hyperplanes are ϵd -almost orthogonal to γ. Since no set
                        ̃ pairwise intersect, it follows from the definition of
of d + 1 hyperplanes of X
N that there is a pairwise disjoint set
                                   {K1 , . . . , Kn }
of n hyperplanes that intersect γ ϵd -almost orthogonally.
    Finally, note that any hyperplane K that crosses Hi meets it orthogonally,
and therefore if γ also crossed K there would be a compact geodesic triangle
   ̃ with two right angles, contradicting the CAT(0) condition. Therefore,
in X
each Kj is disjoint from H1 and H2 , and therefore separates them from each
other.

                                          32
    We needed to find almost orthogonal hyperplanes because of the following
lemma, which will enable us to bound the diameter of a hyperplane inter-
secting a suitably chosen 2-cut.

Lemma 3.11. Suppose that an ℓ2 geodesic γ intersects a hyperplane H at
an angle θ. Let x be the point of intersection and let y be a point in H. Then

                             d(x, y) sin θ ≤ d(y, γ) .

In particular, if H is ϵ-almost orthogonal to γ, d(x, y) ≤ d(y, γ)/ sin ϵ.

Proof. Let z be the closest point on γ to y, and consider the geodesic triangle
with vertices x, y and z. Let θ̄ be the angle in the Euclidean comparison tri-
angle at the vertex corresponding to x, which is at least θ by [10, Proposition
1.7(4)]. Now, the Euclidean sine rule gives

                      d(y, z) ≥ d(x, y) sin θ̄ ≥ d(x, y) sin θ

as required.
   The proof of the claimed bound on the widths of 2-cuts uses the pigeon-
hole principle, applied to isomorphism types of abstract hyperplane compo-
nents of a given diameter.
Remark 3.12. Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube complex, and
let R ≥ 0. The set of isomorphism types of abstract bounding hyperplane
components Z over X of diameter at most R is finite. Indeed, the bound on
diameter implies that there are only finitely many possible subcomplexes Z
                    ̃ up to the action of π1 (X); since WhH (Z) is compact
of hyperplanes H of X,
for each Z, the number of possible cohomology classes in H̃ 0 (WhH (Z); Z/2Z)
is also finite.
    This finiteness is the basis for our argument using the pigeonhole princi-
ple.

Theorem 3.13. Let X be an essential, d-dimensional, hyperbolic cube com-
plex without 0-cuts or 1-cuts. Then π1 (X) is cyclically indecomposable if and
only if there is a bound on the widths of 2-cuts in X.

Proof. The ‘only if’ direction is similar to the proof of Theorem 3.6. If π1 (X)
has a cyclic splitting then, by Lemma 3.4, there is an infinite cyclic subgroup
⟨ϕ⟩ acting cocompactly on some isometrically embedded subcomplex Z        ̃⊆X  ̃
with WhX (Z) ̃ disconnected. As in the proof of Theorem 3.6, we can find a
hyperplane H of Z  ̃ such that, for any n, cutting Z̃ along H and ϕn (H) gives


                                        33
a 2-cut between H and ϕn (H). Since d(H, ϕn (H)) → ∞ with n, it follows
that there is no bound on the widths of 2-cuts, as required.
   For the converse, let Y be a 2-cut between hyperplanes H1 and H2 . By
Lemma 3.8, we may replace Y by its intersection with Hull(H1 ∪ H2 ), and
so assume that Y is contained in Hull(H1 ∪ H2 ). Let γ be an ℓ2 -geodesic
between H1 and H2 . It is easy to see that H1 ∪ γ ∪ H2 is 2δ-quasiconvex in
the ℓ2 metric and therefore, by Theorem 1.8, Hull(H1 ∪ H2 ) is contained in
the R-neighbourhood of H1 ∪ γ ∪ H2 , for some uniform R.
   Let M be the number of isomorphism types of√oriented abstract hyper-
plane components over X of diameter at most 2R 4d − 3 (which is finite by
Remark 3.12). Let M ′ be such√that any geodesic crossing M ′ hyperplanes
has an ℓ2 -length of at least (1 + 4d − 3)R, and let N = M + 2M ′ . By Lemma
3.10, if the width of Y is greater than a constant C, then we can find a
sequence of M + 1 hyperplanes

                                K0 , K 1 , . . . , K M ,

all separating H1 from H2 , all ϵd -almost orthogonal
                                                √     to γ, and such that each
Ki intersects γ at distance greater than (1 + 4d − 3)R from both H1 and
H2 .
    From each Ki we define an oriented abstract hyperplane component Zi as
follows. After setting Zi = Ki ∩Y , we need to define a non-trivial cohomology
class cZi ∈ H̃ 0 (WhKi (Zi )) where, as usual, we consider cohomology with
coefficients in Z/2Z. Cutting Y along Ki decomposes it as

                                 Y = Y1 ∪Ki Y2 ,

and Proposition 2.21 then tells us that

                     WhX (Y ) = WhX (Y1 )#Ki WhX (Y2 ) .

In particular, WhX (Y ){H1 ,H2 } contains a copy of Li = WhKi (Zi ), which is
canonically isomorphic to the links of Ki in both WhX (Y1 ) and WhX (Y2 ) by
Lemma 2.13. Since Y is a 2-cut, there is a non-trivial class cY in the reduced
cohomology group H̃ 0 (WhX (Y ){H1 ,H2 } ). The cohomology class cZi is then
defined as the pullback of cY along the inclusion of Li into WhX (Y ){H1 ,H2 } .
We claim that cZi ≠ 0.
    Indeed, Mayer–Vietoris applied to the decomposition

           WhX (Y ){H1 ,H2 } = WhX (Y1 ){H1 ,Ki } ∪Li WhX (Y2 ){Ki ,H2 }

shows that the pullback b of cY to H̃ 0 (WhX (Y1 ){H1 ,Ki } ) (without loss of
generality) is non-zero. But cZi is the pullback of b to H̃ 0 (Li ), so if cZi = 0

                                          34
then, by Mayer–Vietoris applied to the decomposition

                   WhX (Y1 )H1 = WhX (Y1 ){H1 ,Ki } ∪Li C(Li ) ,

we see that b is the image of a non-trivial cohomology class in H̃ 0 (WhX (Y1 )H1 ),
contradicting the hypothesis that X has no 1-cuts. Hence, cZi ≠ 0 as claimed.
   We next prove a bound on the diameter of any Zi . Indeed, let x be
the point at which Ki intersects γ. Since Y is contained in the closed R-
neighbourhood of H1 ∪ γ ∪ H2 , Zi is the union of two closed subsets:

                                    Zi = P ∪ Q

where P = Zi ∩ (NR (H1 ) ∪ NR (H2 )) and Q = Zi ∩ NR (γ).
   By Lemma 3.11, the distance from any y ∈ Q to x is bounded above by
                      R             R              √
                          =            √       = R  4d − 3 .
                    sin ϵd sin cot−1 (2 d − 1)

We next argue that P is empty. Indeed, if not then there is y ∈ P ∩ Q, since
Zi is connected and P and Q√are both closed. But such a y is within distance
R of H1 ∪ H√2 and within R 4d − 3 of x, so Ki intersects γ at distance less
than R(1 + 4d − 3) from either H1 or H2 , contradicting the construction of
the√Ki above. Thus, P is indeed empty, so Zi = Q and diam(Zi ) = diam(Q) ≤
2R 4d − 3.
    Therefore, by the pigeonhole principle and the choice of M , there exist
distinct i < j such that Zi and Zj are isomorphic oriented abstract hyperplane
components. Cutting Y along Ki and Kj decomposes it as

                              Y = Y1 ∪Ki Y ′ ∪Kj Y2 .

Applying Lemma 2.25 twice, Y ′ is a 2-cut between Ki and Kj , while Zi and
Zj are the corresponding bounding hyperplane components.
    Finally, note that the inclusions of Li = WhKi (Zi ) and Lj = WhKj (Zj )
into WhX (Y ){H1 ,H2 } factor through the inclusion of WhX (Y ′ ){Ki ,Kj } . There-
fore, setting cY ′ to be the pullback of cY to WhX (Y ′ ){Ki ,Kj } , we see that cY ′
pulls back to both cZi and cZj . This completes the proof that Y ′ is a periodic
2-cut.

3.3    From 2-cuts to k-cuts
In the previous section, we proved a uniform bound on the widths of 2-cuts.
In this section, we will upgrade this to a uniform bound on the widths of
k-cuts, where the bound is independent of k. The key result is Lemma 3.21,

                                         35
which encapsulates the fact that a finite collection of hyperplanes coarsely
has the structure of a quasi-tree. I am grateful to Mark Hagen for pointing
out that this lemma should be true, and that it would simplify the proof of
my argument.
    The proof of Lemma 3.21 is inspired by the projection-complex machin-
ery of Bestvina–Bromberg–Fujiwara [6]5 . Consider a collection V = {Vi }
of convex subcomplexes of a hyperbolic, CAT(0) cube complex X.    ̃ (In [6]
this collection would typically be infinite. For us it will be finite, but of
unbounded cardinality.) For each U ∈ V, we consider the closest-point pro-
jection πU ∶ X̃ → U . For each U , Bestvina–Bromberg–Fujiwara use this to
define a distance function on pairs of elements of V ∖ {U } via

                         dπU (V, W ) ∶= diam(πU (V ) ∪ πU (W )) .

They go on to state projection complex axioms for the distance functions dπ● ,
with respect to a fixed constant θ > 0; see [7, §1.3] for a concise statement
of the axioms. The next proposition asserts that, as long as the elements of
V are pairwise sufficiently distant from each other, the projection complex
axioms are satisfied.

Proposition 3.14. Let X    ̃ be a δ-hyperbolic CAT(0) cube complex and let V
                                           ̃ There are constants C and θ > 0,
be a finite set of convex subcomplexes of X.
depending only on X,  ̃ such that, as long as the elements of V are pairwise at
distance at least C, the following hold for all distinct U, V, W, Y ∈ V:

 (i) dπU (V, W ) = dπU (W, V );

 (ii) dπU (V, W ) + dπU (W, Y ) ≥ dπU (V, Y );

(iii) dπU (V, V ) ≤ θ;

(iv) if dπU (V, W ) > θ then dπV (U, W ) ≤ θ;

 (v) #{Z ∈ V ∣ dπZ (V, W ) > θ} < ∞

Proof. Properties (i) and (ii) are obvious, while property (v) is immediate
by hypothesis since V is assumed to be finite. Property (iii) is known as the
contracting property for quasi-convex subspaces of δ-hyperbolic spaces, and
a standard exercise shows that it holds for any θ ≥ 8δ as long as C ≥ 2δ.
Finally, property (iv) is known as the Behrstock inequality. A sketch is given
in [57, p. 133].
  5
    Anthony Genevois has communicated to me a shorter, direct proof of the lemma that
avoids the Bestvina–Bromberg–Fujiwara machinery [25].


                                           36
    In order to construct a quasitree, it is necessary to adjust the distance
functions dπ● to strengthen the Behrstock inequality. For this, we follow
Bestvina–Bromberg–Fujiwara–Sisto [7]. From dπ● , they construct a new fam-
ily of distance functions d● with improved properties.
Proposition 3.15. For dπ● and θ as above, there are functions d● such that

                                  ∣dπ● − d● ∣ ≤ 2θ ,

and that satisfy the following axioms for all distinct U, V, W, Y ∈ V:
 (i) dU (V, W ) = dU (W, V );

 (ii) dU (V, W ) + dU (W, Y ) ≥ dU (V, Y );

(iii) dU (V, V ) ≤ 11θ;

(iv) if dU (V, W ) > 11θ then dW (V, Y ) = dW (U, Y ) unless Y = W ;

 (v) #{Z ∈ V ∣ dZ (V, W ) > θ} < ∞.
Proof. This is [7, Proposition 4.14].
Remark 3.16. Proposition 3.15(iv) should be thought of as a strengthened
version of the Behrstock inequality. Indeed, taking Y = V in Proposition
3.15(iv) shows that, if dU (V, W ) > 11θ, then dW (U, V ) = dW (V, V ) ≤ 11θ by
Proposition 3.15(iii).
   Bestvina–Bromberg–Fujiwara–Sisto use the strengthened projection com-
plex axioms to construct an infinite quasitree PK (V). In our situation,
PK (V) will be finite, and we will use it to find U ∈ V onto which the di-
ameter of the projection of all the other elements of V is bounded.
Definition 3.17 (Projection complex). For any K > 0, the projection com-
plex PK (V) is a graph with vertex set V. Distinct vertices U, V are joined
by an edge if dW (U, V ) ≤ K for all W ≠ U, V .
    For large enough K, they go on to define a standard path in PK (V)
between any U, V ∈ V; we will let [U, V ] denote this standard path. Similarly,
we will let (U, V ) denote [U, V ] ∖ {U, V }, etc. (In [7], the set of vertices in
(U, V ) is denoted by YK (U, V ).) We summarise the properties of standard
paths in the following proposition.
Proposition 3.18 (Properties of standard paths). Suppose K ≥ 33θ. Let
U, V ∈ V. The standard path [U, V ] is an embedded interval in PK (V) be-
tween U and V . Furthermore, the following hold.

                                         37
 (i) If U ′ , V ′ ∈ [U, V ] then [U ′ , V ′ ] ⊆ [U, V ].

 (ii) If n is the length of the standard path [U, V ] then the shortest path in
      PK (V) from U to V has length at least ⌊ n2 ⌋ + 1.

(iii) If W ∈ (U, V ] then dU (V, W ) ≤ K.

Proof. The proofs of [7, §2–3] use a parameter θ that satisfies the strong
projection axioms. In our context, the strong projection axioms are provided
by Proposition 3.15, so we must replace θ by 11θ.
    The vertices of (U, V ) consist of those W ∈ V such that dW (U, V ) > K.
Setting W1 < W2 if dW1 (U, W2 ) > K defines a total order on the vertices of
(U, V ) by [7, Proposition 2.3], to which we may add U as the least element
and V as the greatest element; [7, Lemma 3.1] asserts that these are indeed
the vertices of an embedded path.
    Item (i) now follows immediately from [7, Corollary 2.5] and item (ii) is
[7, Lemma 3.7]. For item (iii), there is nothing to prove if W = V ; otherwise
dW (U, V ) > K > 11θ so dU (V, W ) ≤ 11θ < K by Remark 3.16.
    Bestvina–Bromberg–Fujiwara–Sisto also provide a very precise descrip-
tion of triangles of standard paths.

Lemma 3.19 (Triangles of standard paths). Suppose K ≥ 33θ. Let U, V, W ∈
V. The complement
                      [U, V ] ∖ ([U, W ] ∪ [W, V ])
in PK (V) is connected, and contains at most two vertices.

Proof. This is [7, Lemma 3.6].
    With these facts in hand, we can prove our desired bound on diameters
of projections.

Lemma 3.20. Let X    ̃ be a δ-hyperbolic CAT(0) cube complex and let V be
a finite set of unbounded convex subcomplexes of X   ̃ with at least two ele-
ments. There is a constant C, depending only on X,    ̃ such that, as long as
the elements of V are pairwise at distance at least C, there is U ∈ Y such that

                             diam ( ⋃ πU (V )) ≤ 400θ .
                                     V ∈V∖U

Proof. Let C and θ be as in Proposition 3.14, and consider the projection
complex P33θ (V), defined using the distance functions d● from Proposition
3.15. Since V is finite, there are finitely many standard paths; fix [U, V ] of


                                              38
maximal length. Let V ′ be the vertex of [U, V ] adjacent to U , and let W ′ be
any other vertex of P33θ (V) adjacent to U .
    First, note that U is not contained in the standard path from W ′ to V .
Indeed, if U were contained in [W ′ , V ] then, by Proposition 3.18(i), [U, V ]
would be a proper sub-path of [W ′ , V ], contradicting the choice of U . Note
also that the standard path [U, W ′ ] is a single edge, by Proposition 3.18(ii).
    Next, consider the triangle of standard paths [U, W ′ ] ∪ [W ′ , V ] ∪ [V, U ].
Combining the facts from the previous paragraph with Lemma 3.19, we see
that V ′ is joined to W ′ by an edge-path of length at most 5, avoiding U . By
the definition of P33θ (V) and induction on the length of this edge-path, it
follows that dU (V ′ , W ′ ) ≤ 5 × 33θ = 165θ.
    Now consider an arbitrary W ≠ U in V and let W ′ be the vertex of [W, U ]
adjacent to U . Combining the estimate from the previous paragraph with
Proposition 3.18(iii) gives

         dU (V ′ , W ) ≤ dU (V ′ , W ′ ) + dU (W ′ , W ) ≤ 165θ + 33θ = 198θ .

It follows from Proposition 3.15 that dπU (V ′ , W ) ≤ 200θ, and so dπU (W1 , W2 ) ≤
400θ for any W1 , W2 ≠ U in V, by the triangle inequality. This is the required
bound, by the definition of dπ● .
   The geometric lemma that we need can now be easily deduced.
Lemma 3.21. Let X    ̃ be a d-dimensional, δ-hyperbolic CAT(0) cube com-
plex. There is a constant D with the following property. Suppose that V is
any finite, non-empty set of unbounded convex subcomplexes of X  ̃ and that
d(U, V ) > D for every distinct U, V ∈ V. Then, there exists a hyperplane H
and U ∈ V such that H separates U from every V ∈ V ∖ {U }.
Proof. Let C and θ be as in Lemma 3.20. By Theorem 1.8, there is r such
that, for any subset Z ⊆ X̃ of diameter at most 400θ, the diameter of Hull(Z)
is at most r.                                           √
    For each U ∈ V, let Û be the convex hull of the ( d + r)-neighbourhood
of U , which is contained in the R-neighbourhood of U , for some uniform R,
by Theorem 1.8. Let V  ̂ ∶= {U
                             ̂ ∣ U ∈ V} and let D = C + 2R.
    As long as the elements of V are at distance at least D from each other,
it follows that the elements of V̂ are at distance at least C from each other.
Hence, by Lemma 3.20, there is U   ̂ such that

                          diam ( ⋃ πÛ (V̂ )) ≤ 400θ .
                                  V  ̂ U
                                  ̂ ∈V∖ ̂

        ̂ be the convex hull of ⋃ ̂ ̂ ̂ π ̂ (V̂ ), so diam W ≤ r.
Let W ⊆ U                        V ∈V∖U U


                                            39
                                               ̂ , it follows from the bound on
   Since W contains a point on the frontier of U              √
the diameter of W and the definition of U ̂ that d(U, W ) ≥ d. In particular,
by Lemma 1.7 there is a hyperplane H that separates U from W ; note that
H intersects Û non-trivially by construction.
   Finally, consider any V ≠ U in V. It remains to prove that H separates U
from V . Since H separates U from W , it suffices to prove that H is disjoint
from V and does not separate W from V . Because hyperplanes are convex
and H intersects U ̂ , if H also intersected V then it would intersect W , a
contradiction. So H is disjoint from V . If H separated W from V then a
shortest geodesic γ from V to W would cross H by Lemma 1.7; but γ is also a
shortest geodesic from V to Û , so H would separate V from U    ̂ , contradicting
the fact that H intersects Û.

   We can now upgrade our bound on the widths of 2-cuts to a bound on
the widths of k-cuts.
Theorem 3.22. Let X be an essential, d-dimensional, hyperbolic cube com-
plex without 0-cuts or 1-cuts. Then π1 (X) is cyclically indecomposable if and
only if there is a uniform bound, independent of k, on the widths of all k-cuts
with k ≥ 2.
Proof. If there is a bound on the widths of k-cuts for all k ≥ 2 then, in
particular, there is a bound on the widths of all 2-cuts. Therefore, X is
cyclically essential and π1 (X) is cyclically indecomposable by Theorem 3.13.
   For the converse implication, let C be the bound from Theorem 3.13. By
Theorem 1.8, there is R such that the hull of the C-neighbourhood of any
convex subset is contained in the R neighbourhood of that subset. Let D be
the constant from Lemma 3.21.
   Let Y be a k-cut between a collection of k ≥ 2 hyperplanes {H1 , . . . Hk },
and suppose that the width of Y is greater than 2R + D. Suppose, further-
more, that k is minimal such that there exists a k-cut of width greater than
2R + D.
   For each i, let Ui be the convex hull of the C-neighbourhood of Hi . Then
the Ui are pairwise at distance at least D.
   By Lemma 3.21, there is a hyperplane K that, without loss of generality,
separates U1 from the remaining Hi . In particular, K is at distance at least
C from H1 and separates all the other Hi from H1 . Thus, cutting Y along
K gives
                                  Y = Y1 ∪ K Y 2
where H1 bounds Y1 and the remaining Hi all bound Y2 .
    By the minimality of k, {H2 , . . . , Hk } is not a cut set in WhX (Y2 ). There-
fore, Lemma 2.25 implies that Y1 is a 2-cut between H1 and K, which is of

                                        40
width at least C by construction. By the choice of C, it follows that π1 (X)
is cyclically decomposable, as required.


4     One-ended subgroups
In this section, we prove both our main theorem about cubulated hyperbolic
groups and its corollary about one-relator groups.

4.1    Cubulated hyperbolic groups
With the uniform bound on the widths of cuts in hand, it is easy to prove
the main theorem in the cyclically indecomposable case.

Theorem 4.1. Let X be a hyperbolic cube complex. If π1 (X) is one-ended
and cyclically indecomposable then it has a one-ended quasiconvex subgroup
of infinite index.

Proof. By Corollary 2.34, we may without loss of generality assume that X
is essential, without 0- or 1-cuts. Let C be the uniform bound on widths of
k-cuts given by Theorem 3.22.
    Choose any hyperplane H of X, and fix an elevation H  ̃ to the universal
       ̃
cover X. Because π1 H is separable in G = π1 X by the work of Agol [1] and
Haglund–Wise [32], there is a finite-index subgroup G0 of G such that
                                   ̃ g H)
                                 d(H,  ̃ >C

                        ̃
for any g ∈ G0 ∖ Stab(H).
    Let X0 denote the quotient G0 /X   ̃ and let H0 be the image of H,̃ which
is a hyperplane of X0 . Let X be (a component of) the result of cutting X0
                                ′

along H0 . Since X ′ is finite and maps locally isometrically to X, π1 (X ′ ) is a
quasiconvex subgroup of G. Furthermore, since π1 (X ′ ) is a vertex-group of
a non-trivial graph-of groups decomposition for G0 , it has infinite index in
G0 , and hence in G. It remains to show that π1 (X ′ ) is one-ended.
    With a view to a contradiction, suppose that π1 (X ′ ) is freely decom-
posable. By Proposition 2.18, there is a 0-cut Y → X ′ . But WhX ′ (Y ) is
obtained from WhX (Y ) by deleting the G0 -translates of H,   ̃ so some finite
set of translates
                                     ̃ . . . , gk H
                                  g1 H,           ̃

(with gi ∈ G0 ) defines a cut set in WhX (Y ). Since WhX (Y ) has no 0-cut
or 1-cuts, k ≥ 2. Therefore Y is a k-cut in X  ̃ of width greater than C,
contradicting the choice of C.

                                       41
   By passing to the Grushko and Bowditch JSJ decompositions, the main
theorem follows.
Proof of Theorem A. Since π1 (X) is a finitely generated, torsion-free group,
it is freely indecomposable if and only if it is one-ended, by Stallings’ theo-
rem [58]. If π1 (X) is freely decomposable, Grushko’s theorem implies that
either π1 (X) is free or it has a one-ended free factor, which is necessarily
a quasiconvex subgroup of infinite index. Therefore, we may assume that
π1 (X) is itself one-ended.
    Consider the Bowditch JSJ decomposition of π1 (X) [9]. If the decompo-
sition has only one vertex and no edges, then that vertex is either of surface
or of rigid type. In the former case, π1 (X) is a surface group. In the latter
case, π1 (X) is cyclically indecomposable, so it has a one-ended, quasiconvex
subgroup of infinite index by Theorem 4.1.
    Now consider the case where the JSJ decomposition is non-trivial. Every
vertex group V is quasiconvex [9, Proposition 1.2], and in particular finitely
generated and hyperbolic. If some vertex group V is not itself free, then by
Grushko’s theorem it has a one-ended free factor V ′ , which provides a one-
ended, quasiconvex subgroup, necessarily of infinite index in π1 (X). On the
other hand, if every vertex group is free, then π1 (X) is either a surface group
or contains a one-ended, quasiconvex subgroup by [65, Theorem 3].

4.2    One-relator groups
Combining the result for cubulated hyperbolic groups with recent joint work
of the author with Louder [38, 39], and also work of Linton [37] and Gardam–
Kielak–Logan [23], we can also answer Question 0.1 for one-relator groups.
The key is Puder’s notion of primitivity rank [48].
Definition 4.2 (Primitivity rank). Let w be a non-trivial element of a free
group F . The primitivity rank π(w) is the minimal rank of a subgroup
w ∈ H ⊆ F such that w is not a primitive element of H.
    By convention, min ∅ = ∞, so π(w) = ∞ if and only if w is primitive in F
(and hence in every subgroup containing it). As a result of this convention,
π(w) ≥ 1 for all w. (It can be convenient to extend the definition of π to the
trivial element 1 ∈ F and set π(1) = 0.)
    It has recently been discovered that π(w) determines several features of
the one-relator group G = F /⟪w⟫. These results can be summarised in the
following theorem.
Theorem 4.3. Let F be free, w a non-trivial element of F and G = F /⟪w⟫.
Then:

                                      42
 (i) π(w) = ∞ if and only if G is free;

 (ii) π(w) = 1 if and only if G has torsion;

(iii) if π(w) = 2 then G has a two-generator, one-relator subgroup P that is
      not free;

(iv) if π(w) > 2 then G is hyperbolic and cubulated.

Proof. Item (i) is a result of the classical theorem of Whitehead that, for
non-trivial w, G is free if and only if w is primitive [40, Proposition 5.10].
It is easy to see that π(w) = 1 if and only if w is a proper power in F ; a
classical theorem of Karrass–Magnus–Solitar asserts that this is true exactly
when G has torsion [40, Proposition 5.17]. Item (iii) is a theorem of Louder
and the author [38, Theorem 1.5], while item (iv) is a theorem of Linton [37,
Theorem 8.2] (using deep work of Wise [69], as well as further work of Louder
and the author [39]).
Remark 4.4. The one-relator group G is also hyperbolic and cubulated when
π(w) = 1, by work of Newman [44] and Wise [69]. However, we will not need
either of these facts here.
    The final piece of the jigsaw is a recent result of Gardam–Kielak–Logan,
who handled the two-generator, one-relator case of Question 0.1 [23, Theorem
1.5].

Theorem 4.5 (Gardam–Kielak–Logan). Let G be a two-generator, one-
relator group. If every subgroup of infinite index in G is free, then G is
either free or the fundamental group of a closed surface.

    Combining these results with Theorem A, we obtain the desired result
for all one-relator groups.
Proof of Theorem D. A one-relator group G = F /⟪w⟫ is free if π(w) = 0 or
π(w) = ∞. Since G is infinite and every subgroup of infinite index is free, G
is torsion-free, so π(w) > 1. If π(w) > 2 then G is hyperbolic and cubulated
by Theorem 4.3(iv), so the result follows from Theorem A. Thus, it remains
to handle the case when π(w) = 2.
    In this case, G has a two-generator, one-relator subgroup P that is not
free by Theorem 4.3(iii). The index of P in G is finite by hypothesis, and
every subgroup of infinite index in P is free. By Theorem 4.5, P is either Z2
or Z ⋊ Z, so the same is true of G by Bieberbach’s theorem.




                                     43
5         Strebel’s theorem
Let G be an n-dimensional Poincaré duality group. Strebel proved that
any subgroup of infinite index in G must have strictly smaller cohomological
dimension [61], paralleling an older theorem of Whitehead about manifolds
[64].

Theorem 5.1 (Strebel theorem). Let G be a P Dn group. If H is a subgroup
of infinite index in G, then cd(H) < n.

    By Stallings’ theorem, Theorem A can be thought of as a converse to
Strebel’s theorem when n = 1 and G is hyperbolic and cubulated. It is
therefore natural to wonder whether, if G remains hyperbolic and cubulated,
the converse is also true for larger n.6 The purpose of this section is to note
that this converse fails. I am grateful to Genevieve Walsh and Macarena
Arenas for explaining this to me.
    The key point is that Strebel’s theorem is not optimal. Indeed, the fol-
lowing stronger result is given as an exercise in Brown’s book [12, Exercise
4, p. 203].

Theorem 5.2 (Strong Strebel theorem). Let G be a group of type F P and
cohomological dimension n, and suppose H n (G, ZG) is finitely generated as
an abelian group. If H is a subgroup of infinite index in G, then cd(H) < n.

    With the stronger theorem in hand, we can provide an example of a 3-
dimensional group, which is not a P D3 group, but such that every subgroup
of infinite index is at most 2-dimensional.
Example 5.3. Let L be a square-free flag triangulation of the 2-dimensional
torus (which exists by a lemma of Dranishnikov [20, Proposition 2.1]). Let
WL be the corresponding right-angled Coxeter group, and let G = [WL , WL ]
be the commutator subgroup. Then G is a hyperbolic, cubulated group,
acting properly and cocompactly on the Davis cube complex X;   ̃ let X be the
                                                    ̃ and hence also of X,
quotient cube complex. The link of every vertex of X,
is isomorphic to the torus L.
     The group G has geometric and cohomological dimension 3, but is not a
Poincaré duality group. Indeed, the Gromov boundary ∂∞ G is the Pontryagin
sphere [47, Remark 4.4(1)], which is 2-dimensional with Ȟ 2 (∂∞ G; Z) ≅ Z and
Ȟ 1 (∂∞ G; Z) ≅ Z∞ . By the Bestvina–Mess theorem [8, Corollary 1.3],

                               H ∗ (G; ZG) ≅ Ȟ ∗−1 (∂∞ G; Z) ,
    6
        This was stated as an open question in an earlier version of this paper.



                                               44
so G has cohomological dimension 3, and every subgroup of infinite index
has cohomological dimension at most 2 by Theorem 5.2. But G is not P D3 ,
because H 2 (G, ZG) ≅ Ȟ 1 (∂∞ G; Z) ≠ 0.
   Thus, Theorem A should actually be thought of as a conditional converse
to Theorem 5.2 in dimension 2.


6    Questions
This final section contains some open questions that are suggested by the
results of this paper.
    As explained in §5, Theorem A can be thought of as a converse to the
strong Strebel theorem (Theorem 5.2) in dimension 2, for cubulated hyper-
bolic groups. Therefore, we can ask whether similar converses hold in higher
dimensions.

Question 6.1. Let X be a hyperbolic cube complex with G = π1 (X) and
cd(G) = n > 2. If the cohomological dimension of every subgroup of infinite
index in G is less than n, does it follow that H n (G, ZG) is finitely generated
as an abelian group?

   The proof of Theorem A made essential use of the separability of hy-
perplane stabilisers, which is closely related to the fact that X is virtually
special. Removing this condition would necessitate a different approach.

Question 6.2. Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube complex with
every subgroup of infinite index free. Must π1 (X) be either a free group or a
surface group?

Combined with Theorem A, the well known flat-closing conjecture would
imply a positive answer.
    In a similar vein, removing the cubulation hypothesis from Theorem A
would be a major breakthrough. The following question reiterates [5, Ques-
tions 1.7 and 1.11].

Question 6.3 (Gromov, Whyte). Let G be an infinite hyperbolic group. If
every subgroup of infinite index in G is free, must G be either a free group
or a surface group?

Of course, if every one-ended hyperbolic group had a surface subgroup, then
Question 6.3 would have an affirmative answer.
    The next question addresses the slight mismatch between the conclusions
of Theorems A and D.

                                      45
Question 6.4. Let G be a two-generator, one-relator group such that every
finitely generated subgroup of infinite index is free. Must G be isomorphic to
either Z or a solvable Baumslag–Solitar group?
(Note that the two two-generator surface groups, Z2 and Z ⋊ Z, are BS(1, 1)
and BS(1, −1) respectively.)
    As explained in §2.5, any non-positively curved square complex can be
‘unfolded’ until Theorem E applies, providing an effective geometric compu-
tation of the Grushko decomposition. I would like to extend this method to
higher-dimensional cube complexes.7
    The first step is to recognise whether or not the cube complex X is essen-
tial. Sam Shepherd has explained to me that being essential can be recognised
algorithmically: the key observation is that an inessential CAT(0) cube com-
plex contains a half-space that is minimal with respect to inclusion, and the
bounding hyperplane of a minimal half-space can be recognised [56].
    Given essential X, the next step is to determine whether or not π1 (X)
splits freely. The following question asks whether or not the sufficient condi-
tion of Theorem E can always be applied.
Question 6.5. Let G be a one-ended cubulable group. Is G ≅ π1 (X), where
X is essential and no vertex of X has a link with a separating simplex?
Shepherd’s theorem (Theorem 2.32) implies that there is an X without sep-
arating vertices in the links, but does not provide information about higher-
dimensional simplices. Regardless of the answer to Question 6.5, it is also
important to find an algorithmic condition to recognise whether or not X
admits 0- or 1-cuts.
    Assuming an understanding of free splittings, one may pose similar ques-
tions about splittings over Z. It is not clear if there is an analogue of Theorem
E for cyclic splittings.
Question 6.6. Let X be a compact, non-positively curved cube complex with
π1 (X) one-ended. Is there a condition on the links of vertices of X that
guarantees that π1 (X) does not split over Z?
For instance, it seems probable that the techniques of this article can be used
to prove that, if X is a hyperbolic square complex and the links of vertices
of X are connected without cut vertices or cut pairs, then π1 (X) does not
split over Z. But it would be better still to provide a local criterion for
higher-dimensional cube complexes, or outside the hyperbolic setting.
   7
    Touikan’s algorithm provides a general computation of the Grushko decomposition for
any torsion-free group with solvable word problem [62]. However, a cubical method would
be preferable.

                                          46
    As a step towards understanding cyclic splittings outside the hyperbolic
setting, the next question asks whether the hyperbolicity hypothesis can be
removed from Theorem 3.6.
Question 6.7. Let X be a compact, essential, non-positively curved cube
complex without 0- or 1-cuts. If π1 (X) splits over Z, must X admit a periodic
2-cut?
The converse statement, that π1 (X) splits over Z if X admits a periodic
2-cut, follows from the algebraic annulus theorem of Dunwoody–Swenson
[21].


References
 [1] Ian Agol. The virtual Haken conjecture. Doc. Math., 18:1045–1087,
     2013. With an appendix by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning.
 [2] Benjamin Barrett. Computing JSJ decompositions of hyperbolic groups.
     J. Topol., 11(2):527–558, 2018.
 [3] Gilbert Baumslag, Benjamin Fine, and Gerhard Rosenberger. One-
     relator groups: an overview. In Groups St Andrews 2017 in Birmingham,
     volume 455 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 119–157.
     Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2019.
 [4] Gilbert Baumslag, Alexei G. Myasnikov, and Vladimir Shpilrain. Open
     problems in combinatorial group theory. Second edition. In Combinato-
     rial and geometric group theory (New York, 2000/Hoboken, NJ, 2001),
     volume 296 of Contemp. Math., pages 1–38. Amer. Math. Soc., Provi-
     dence, RI, 2002.
 [5] Mladen Bestvina. Questions in geometric group theory. http://www.
     math.utah.edu/~bestvina/eprints/questions-updated.pdf.
 [6] Mladen Bestvina, Ken Bromberg, and Koji Fujiwara. Constructing
     group actions on quasi-trees and applications to mapping class groups.
     Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci., 122:1–64, 2015.
 [7] Mladen Bestvina, Ken Bromberg, Koji Fujiwara, and Alessandro Sisto.
     Acylindrical actions on projection complexes. Enseign. Math., 65(1-
     2):1–32, 2019.
 [8] Mladen Bestvina and Geoffrey Mess. The boundary of negatively curved
     groups. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 4(3):469–481, 1991.

                                     47
 [9] Brian Bowditch. Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic
     groups. Acta Math., 180(2):145–186, 1998.

[10] Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-
     positive curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen
     Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences].
     Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.

[11] P. Brinkmann. Hyperbolic automorphisms of free groups. Geom. Funct.
     Anal., 10(5):1071–1089, 2000.

[12] Kenneth S. Brown. Cohomology of groups, volume 87 of Graduate Texts
     in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994. Corrected reprint of
     the 1982 original.

[13] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Frédéric Haglund. On geometric flats in
     the CAT(0) realization of Coxeter groups and Tits buildings. Canad. J.
     Math., 61(4):740–761, 2009.

[14] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Michah Sageev. Rank rigidity for CAT(0)
     cube complexes. Geom. Funct. Anal., 21(4):851–891, 2011.

[15] Christopher H. Cashen. Splitting line patterns in free groups. Algebr.
     Geom. Topol., 16(2):621–673, 2016.

[16] Christopher H. Cashen and Nataša Macura. Line patterns in free groups.
     Geom. Topol., 15(3):1419–1475, 2011.

[17] L. Ciobanu, B. Fine, and G. Rosenberger. The surface group conjecture:
     cyclically pinched and conjugacy pinched one-relator groups. Results
     Math., 64(1-2):175–184, 2013.

[18] Guo-An Diao and Mark Feighn. The Grushko decomposition of a finite
     graph of finite rank free groups: an algorithm. Geometry and Topology,
     9:1835–1880, 2005.

[19] Warren Dicks. On Whitehead’s first free-group algorithm, cutvertices,
     and free-product factorizations. arXiv:1704.05338, 2017.

[20] A. N. Dranishnikov. Boundaries of Coxeter groups and simplicial com-
     plexes with given links. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 137(2):139–151, 1999.

[21] M. J. Dunwoody and E. L. Swenson. The algebraic torus theorem.
     Invent. Math., 140(3):605–637, 2000.


                                    48
[22] B. Fine, O. G. Kharlampovich, A. G. Myasnikov, V. N. Remeslennikov,
     and G. Rosenberger. On the surface group conjecture. Sci. Ser. A Math.
     Sci. (N.S.), 15:1–15, 2007.

[23] Giles Gardam, Dawid Kielak, and Alan D. Logan. The surface group
     conjectures for groups with two generators. Math. Res. Lett., 30(1):109–
     123, 2023.

[24] Anthony Genevois. Morphisms between right-angled Coxeter groups
     and the embedding problem in dimension two. Math. Z., 300(1):259–
     299, 2022.

[25] Anthony Genevois. Personal communication, 2024.

[26] S. M. Gersten. On Whitehead’s algorithm. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.
     (N.S.), 10(2):281–284, 1984.

[27] M. Gromov. Hyperbolic groups. In Essays in group theory, volume 8 of
     Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 75–263. Springer, New York, 1987.

[28] Mark F. Hagen. Weak hyperbolicity of cube complexes and quasi-
     arboreal groups. J. Topol., 7(2):385–418, 2014.

[29] Mark F. Hagen and Daniel T. Wise. Cubulating hyperbolic free-by-cyclic
     groups: the general case. Geom. Funct. Anal., 25(1):134–179, 2015.

[30] Mark F. Hagen and Daniel T. Wise. Cubulating hyperbolic free-by-
     cyclic groups: the irreducible case. Duke Math. J., 165(9):1753–1813,
     2016.

[31] Frédéric Haglund. Finite index subgroups of graph products. Geom.
     Dedicata, 135:167–209, 2008.

[32] Frédéric Haglund and Daniel T. Wise. Special cube complexes. Geo-
     metric and Functional Analysis, 17(5):1551–1620, 2008.

[33] Allen Hatcher. Algebraic topology. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
     bridge, 2002.

[34] Ingebrigt Johansson. Topologische Untersuchungen über unverzweigte
     Überlagerungsflächen. PhD thesis, University of Oslo, 1931.

[35] E. I. Khukhro and V. D. Mazurov. Unsolved problems in group theory.
     the Kourovka notebook. arXiv:1401.0300v28, 2023.


                                     49
[36] Sang-hyun Kim and Henry Wilton. Polygonal words in free groups. Q.
     J. Math., 63(2):399–421, 2012.

[37] Marco Linton. One-relator hierarchies. Duke Math. J., 174(4):747–802,
     2025.

[38] Larsen Louder and Henry Wilton. Negative immersions for one-relator
     groups. Duke Math. J., 171(3):547–594, 2022.

[39] Larsen Louder and Henry Wilton. Uniform negative immersions and the
     coherence of one-relator groups. Invent. Math., 236(2):673–712, 2024.

[40] Roger C. Lyndon and Paul E. Schupp. Combinatorial group theory.
     Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer
     Grenzgebiete, Band 89.

[41] Herbert C. Lyon. Incompressible surfaces in the boundary of a
     handlebody—an algorithm. Canadian J. Math., 32(3):590–595, 1980.

[42] Jason Fox Manning. Virtually geometric words and Whitehead’s algo-
     rithm. Math. Res. Lett., 17(5):917–925, 2010.

[43] Yoshiyuki Nakagawa, Makoto Tamura, and Yasushi Yamashita. Non-
     hyperbolic automatic groups and groups acting on CAT(0) cube com-
     plexes. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 24(6):795–813, 2014.

[44] B. B. Newman. Some results on one-relator groups. Bull. Amer. Math.
     Soc., 74:568–571, 1968.

[45] G. A. Niblo. The singularity obstruction for group splittings. Topology
     Appl., 119(1):17–31, 2002.

[46] A. Ju. Ol’šanskiı̆. An infinite simple torsion-free Noetherian group. Izv.
     Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat., 43(6):1328–1393, 1979.

[47] Piotr Przytycki and Jacek Świątkowski. Flag-no-square triangulations
     and Gromov boundaries in dimension 3. Groups Geom. Dyn., 3(3):453–
     468, 2009.

[48] Doron Puder. Primitive words, free factors and measure preservation.
     Israel J. Math., 201(1):25–73, 2014.

[49] Rowan Rowlands. Relating CAT(0) cubical complexes and flag simplicial
     complexes. Adv. in Appl. Math., 147:Paper No. 102502, 35, 2023.


                                      50
[50] Michah Sageev. Ends of group pairs and non-positively curved cube
     complexes. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 71(3):585–617, 1995.

[51] Michah Sageev and Daniel T. Wise. Periodic flats in CAT(0) cube
     complexes. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 11(3):1793–1820, 2011.

[52] Peter Scott and Terry Wall. Topological methods in group theory. In
     Homological group theory (Proc. Sympos., Durham, 1977), volume 36 of
     London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 137–203. Cambridge Univ.
     Press, Cambridge, 1979.

[53] Jean-Pierre Serre. Trees. Springer Monographs in Mathematics.
     Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003. Translated from the French original by
     John Stillwell, Corrected 2nd printing of the 1980 English translation.

[54] Abe Shenitzer. Decomposition of a group with a single defining relation
     into a free product. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society,
     6:273–279, 1955.

[55] Sam Shepherd. Semistability of cubulated groups. Math. Ann., 387(3-
     4):1481–1511, 2023.

[56] Sam Shepherd. Personal communication, 2024.

[57] Alessandro Sisto. What is a hierarchically hyperbolic space? In Beyond
     hyperbolicity, volume 454 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages
     117–148. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2019.

[58] John R Stallings. On torsion-free groups with infinitely many ends.
     Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 88:312–334, 1968.

[59] John R. Stallings. Whitehead graphs on handlebodies. In Geometric
     group theory down under (Canberra, 1996), pages 317–330. de Gruyter,
     Berlin, 1999.

[60] Richard Stong. Diskbusting elements of the free group. Math. Res. Lett.,
     4(2-3):201–210, 1997.

[61] R. Strebel. A remark on subgroups of infinite index in Poincaré duality
     groups. Comment. Math. Helv., 52(3):317–324, 1977.

[62] Nicholas W. M. Touikan. Detecting geometric splittings in finitely pre-
     sented groups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 370(8):5635–5704, 2018.



                                     51
[63] J. H. C. Whitehead. On equivalent sets of elements in a free group. Ann.
     of Math. (2), 37(4):782–800, 1936.

[64] J. H. C. Whitehead. The immersion of an open 3-manifold in euclidean
     3-space. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 11:81–90, 1961.

[65] Henry Wilton. One-ended subgroups of graphs of free groups. Geom.
     Topol., 16:665–683, 2012.

[66] Henry Wilton. Rational curvature invariants for 2-complexes. Proc. A.,
     480(2296):Paper No. 20240025, 39, 2024.

[67] D. T. Wise. Cubulating small cancellation groups. Geom. Funct. Anal.,
     14(1):150–214, 2004.

[68] Daniel T. Wise. The cubical route to understanding groups. In Pro-
     ceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians 2014, Seoul,
     Korea, 13–21 August, 2014.

[69] Daniel T. Wise. The structure of groups with a quasiconvex hierarchy,
     volume 209 of Annals of Mathematics Studies. Princeton University
     Press, Princeton, NJ, [2021] ©2021.


   DPMMS, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Wilberforce Road, Cam-
bridge, CB3 0WB, UK
   E-mail address: h.wilton@maths.cam.ac.uk




                                     52
