                                                   The isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic groups.
arXiv:1002.2590v2 [math.GR] 31 Dec 2010




                                                                      François Dahmani, Vincent Guirardel


                                                                                       Abstract
                                                    We give a solution to Dehn’s isomorphism problem for the class of all hyperbolic
                                                groups, possibly with torsion. We also prove a relative version for groups with peripheral
                                                structures. As a corollary, we give a uniform solution to Whitehead’s problem asking
                                                whether two tuples of elements of a hyperbolic group G are in the same orbit under the
                                                action of Aut(G). We also get an algorithm computing a generating set of the group of
                                                automorphisms of a hyperbolic group preserving a peripheral structure.


                                          1    Introduction
                                          In 1912, Dehn asked about three fundamental algorithmic problems for groups: the word
                                          problem, the conjugacy problem, and the isomorphism problem. The word problem and the
                                          conjugacy problem in a group G consist in deciding algorithmically whether two words in
                                          some finite generating set represent the same or conjugate elements in G. On the other hand,
                                          the isomorphism problem for a class of groups consists in deciding algorithmically whether
                                          two group presentations in this class represent isomorphic groups. It is remarkable that the
                                          answers to such algorithmic problems, positive or negative, in generality or in particular
                                          classes, have repeatedly revealed deep and fruitful structures in group theory.
                                              In the 1950’s, it was discovered that all of these problems have negative answers in the class
                                          of all finitely presented groups. More precisely, Boone and Novikov proved the existence of a
                                          finitely presented group for which no algorithm can solve the word problem [Boo57, Nov52].
                                          Adyan and Rabin used such a group to prove that no algorithm can decide whether an
                                          arbitrary finite presentation defines a non-trivial group [Ady55, Rab58].
                                              However there are many interesting and large classes of groups for which algorithms solving
                                          the word and conjugacy problems are well know. Therefore, groups with unsolvable word
                                          problem are often regarded as monsters, or as constructed “on purpose”.
                                              In striking contrast, the isomorphism problem is unsolvable for some very natural classes
                                          of groups, including the class of free-by-free groups (Miller [Mil71]), the class of [free abelian]-
                                          by-free groups (Zimmermann [Zim85]), or the class of solvable groups of derived length 3
                                          (Baumslag-Gildenhuys-Strebel [BGS85] following [Kha81]).
                                              In fact, until recently and the use of geometric group theory, the isomorphism problem was
                                          known to be decidable in only a few cases, including notably the class of virtually polycyclic
                                          and nilpotent groups by Grunewald and Segal ([GS80, Seg90]). The isomorphism problem
                                          for the class of Coxeter groups, the class of generalised Baumslag-Solitar groups, and of one-
                                          relator groups have been investigated but remain unsettled [Bah05, CF08, Pie74, Pri77].

                                             Z. Sela’s solution of the isomorphism problem for the class of rigid torsion-free hyperbolic
                                          groups was certainly a great breakthrough [Sel95]. Sela also had a solution for the class of


                                                                                            1
all torsion-free hyperbolic groups but did not publish it. This program was continued by
D. Groves and the first author, who simplified Sela’s initial approach, and gave a proof for
the class of all torsion free hyperbolic groups and toral relative hyperbolic groups [DG08b].

Statement of main results. In this paper, we give a solution to the isomorphism problem
for the class of all word-hyperbolic groups (as defined in [Gro87]), possibly with torsion.

Theorem 1. There is an explicit algorithm that takes as input two presentations of hyperbolic
groups, and which decides whether these groups are isomorphic or not.

   A result by Newman shows that one-relator groups with non-trivial torsion are hyperbolic
[New68]. We thus get the following corollary:

Corollary 2. The isomorphism problem for one-relator groups with non-trivial torsion is
solvable.

    In our methods, the solution of the isomorphism problem is symbiotic with the computa-
tion of a generating set of the group of automorphisms.

Theorem 3. There is an explicit algorithm that takes as input a presentation of a hyperbolic
group G, and which computes a generating set of Aut(G) and Out(G).

    In our solution of the isomorphism problem (as well as in [DG08b]), one needs to compute
various decompositions of hyperbolic groups as amalgamated free products, HNN extensions,
and more generally, as graphs of groups. This raises the natural question whether vertex
groups of a graph of groups are isomorphic relative to their adjacent edge subgroups. A
variation of this problem is to consider groups equipped with marked peripheral structures,
namely a finite ordered collection of tuples of elements that are thought of as generating sets
of the adjacent edge groups. More precisely, (S1 , . . . , Sn ) is a marked peripheral structure on
G if each Si is a tuple of elements of G (each tuple being understood up to conjugacy).
    Given G, G′ two groups, and marked peripheral structures (S1 , . . . , Sn ) and (S1′ , . . . , Sn′ ),
the marked isomorphism problem consists in deciding if there exists an isomorphism f : G →
                                ′g ′
G′ sending Si to a conjugate Si i of Si′ for all i.

Theorem 4. [see Theorem 8.1] The marked isomorphism problem is solvable among hyper-
bolic groups with marked peripheral structures.
    Moreover, one can algorithmically compute a generating set of the group of automorphisms
of a hyperbolic group with marked peripheral structure.

   Although of more technical appearance, Theorem 4 has a particularly nice consequence.
The Whitehead problem in a group G, asks whether two tuples of elements G are in the
same orbit under the automorphism group of G. Theorem 4 gives a uniform solution to the
Whitehead problem for all hyperbolic groups.

Corollary 5 (see cor. 8.3). Given G a hyperbolic group and g1 , . . . , gn , g1′ , . . . , gn′ ∈ G, one
can decide if there exists an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) sending gi to gi′ for all i.
    One can also decide if there exists an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) sending gi to a conjugate
of gi′ for all i.



                                                   2
    A solution of the Whitehead problem was known for free groups [Whi36, HL74], and sur-
face groups [LV00]. It is interesting to notice that even in these cases, our approach is quite
different from previous ones as it is ultimately based on the computation of relative Grushko
and JSJ decompositions of G.


Structural features. Our approach follows the strategy initiated by Sela [Sel95], and con-
tinued by Groves and the first author as exposed in [DG08b, Section 2].
    Our result is based on the following three main structural features:

   • the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space of maximal decompositions of G over finite
     groups
   • a rigidity criterion, saying that for a one-ended hyperbolic group G, Out(G) is infinite if
     and only if G has an “interesting” splitting providing an infinite group of Dehn twists,
   • a particular kind of canonical JSJ decomposition, adapted to the rigidity criterion.

Moreover, we prove that these features are algorithmic: one can compute these invariants,
and decide whether the rigidity criterion holds. The two major algorithmic tools we use are
Gerasimov’s algorithm which detects whether a given hyperbolic group splits over a finite
subgroup ([Ger], see also a published version in [DG08a]), and a solution to the problem
of equations in hyperbolic groups, [DG09]. These algorithms themselves rely on interesting
structures. We do not detail them here, instead we refer the interested reader to the indicated
bibliography.

   Let us now give more details about these structural features and their computation.

The Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space. The Stallings-Dunwoody deformation
space of G is the set of decompositions of G as graphs of groups with finite edge groups
and finite or one-ended vertex groups. Existence of such a decomposition for a finitely pre-
sented group is Dunwoody’s original accessibility, and Stallings’ theorem shows its relation
with the number of ends of G.
    Gerasimov’s algorithm [Ger, DG08a] allows one to compute some decomposition in this
deformation space. In absence of torsion, the uniqueness property of the Grushko decompo-
sition up to isomorphism reduces immediately the isomorphism problem to the case of freely
indecomposable groups.
    In presence of torsion, there is no such nice uniqueness statement. Instead, we use the
fact that the action of Out(G) on the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space is cocompact,
and that two reduced trees in this deformation space are connected by slide moves. Starting
from a particular decomposition in this deformation space given by Gerasimov’s algorithm,
we are able to compute the vertices of the quotient of this deformation space by Out(G), i. e.
the finite set of all isomorphism classes of reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decompositions. Once
this is done, the isomorphism problem for several-ended hyperbolic groups reduces to the
isomorphism problem for one-ended hyperbolic groups with a peripheral structure consisting
of finite groups. This is done in Section 7.

The rigidity criterion. To introduce our version of the rigidity criterion, first consider the
torsion-free case. If G is a one-ended torsion-free hyperbolic group with Out(G) infinite, the


                                               3
Bestvina-Paulin argument shows that G has a small action on an R-tree [Bes88, Pau88]. Then
by Rips theory, one can construct a non-trivial splitting G = A ∗C B (or an HNN extension
G = A∗C , but let’s ignore this case in this introduction) over a maximal cyclic subgroup C
of G [Sel95, Theorem 9.1]. Conversely, a splitting G = A ∗C B, any c 6= 1 in the centre of C
defines a Dehn twist τc as the identity on A and the conjugation by c on B. If C is a maximal
cyclic subgroup of G, then A and B have finite centre which guarantees that τc has infinite
order in Out(G).
    In presence of torsion, the class of virtually cyclic groups naturally generalises that of
cyclic groups. However, because the infinite dihedral group D∞ has trivial centre, there is
no non-trivial Dehn twist (in the sense we just discussed) arising from an amalgamated free
product A ∗D∞ B, even though D∞ is indeed virtually cyclic. With this example in mind, a
good dichotomy over virtually cyclic groups is to distinguish whether their centre is infinite or
finite. We call Z-groups the virtually cyclic groups with infinite centre, and Zmax -subgroups
the Z-subgroups maximal for inclusion. Only splittings over Z-groups provide Dehn twists
that can be of infinite order (see [MNS99] where this difficulty was already spotted), and
the fact that they are of infinite order is guaranteed for splittings over Zmax -subgroups. An
important observation we make, is that a rigidity criterion remains true in presence of torsion:

Proposition 6. (Rigidity criterion, see Proposition 3.1)
   Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group. Then the following assertions are equivalent:

  1. G does not split non-trivially over a Zmax -subgroup,
  2. Out(G) is finite,
  3. There exists R > 0 such that, modulo inner automorphisms, there are only finitely many
     endomorphisms of G injective on the ball of radius R.
  4. For all hyperbolic group H, there exists R > 0 such that, modulo inner automorphisms
     of H, there are only finitely many morphisms G → H injective on the ball of radius R
     of G.

    See [Lev05a, Theorem 1.4] for a similar statement. The first part of this equivalence
is proved by observing that a splitting over Zmax -subgroups provides Dehn twists making
Out(G) infinite. Assuming the negation of the fourth assertion, the Bestvina-Paulin argument
produces an action on an R-tree, whose careful analysis shows the existence of a Zmax splitting.

Isomorphism problem and recognition of rigid groups. An important idea of Sela
is to use, in conjunction to such a rigidity criterion, a solution to the problem of equations
to get a finite list of morphisms G → H containing a representative of all monomorphisms
[Sel95]. This approach was simplified in [DG08b], thanks to the use of rational constraints in
systems of equations. In [DG09], we developed a solution to the problem of equations with
(quasi-isometrically embedded) rational constraints in hyperbolic groups with torsion. We
follow the same approach, using this solution to the problem of equations together with our
rigidity criterion mentioned above.
    Let us describe this approach. Morphisms ϕ : G → H can be encoded by solutions in H
of a system of equations corresponding to the presentation of G; injectivity of ϕ on the ball
of radius R can be encoded by inequations; and roughly speaking, rational constraints can
be used to ensure that two morphisms ϕ, ϕ′ do not coincide modulo inner automorphisms of
H. Thus, given ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn : G → H, one can produce a system of equations with rational
constraints saying that ϕ : G → H is a morphism injective on the ball of radius R, distinct

                                               4
from ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn modulo inner automorphisms of H. Now if Assertion 4 of the rigidity criterion
holds, one can enumerate all morphisms G → H, and one will eventually find a finite family
ϕ1 . . . , ϕn : G → H such that the corresponding system has no solutions. This attests that
every monomorphism ϕ : G → H is post-conjugate to some ϕi .
    This argument has two important consequences. First, this allows to recognise whether
a one-ended hyperbolic group G is rigid (i. e. satisfies Proposition 6) or not. Indeed, if G
is rigid, one can apply the argument above with H = G, thus attesting that Assertion 3
of Proposition 6 holds. If G is not rigid, the fact that Assertion 1 fails can be attested by
producing a splitting of G. Second, if both G and H are rigid, one can compute two finite list
of morphisms ϕi : G → H and ψj : H → G containing a representative of all monomorphisms
up to inner automorphisms. Then one solves the isomorphism problem between G and H by
checking whether there exists i, j such that ϕi ◦ ψj and ψj ◦ ϕi are inner automorphisms. This
is the content of Section 3.2.

JSJ decompositions. Thanks to the decidability of the rigidity criterion, one can decide if
G has a splitting over a Zmax -subgroup. Then, using a relative version of the rigidity criterion
(Proposition 3.1), one can decide if the vertex groups split over Zmax -subgroups relative to
the incident edge groups. Iterating this procedure, one can compute a maximal splitting over
Zmax -subgroups of G.
    However, such a splitting is not unique up to automorphisms, and we cannot use it to
reduce the isomorphism problem to the case of rigid hyperbolic groups (even rigid relative to
a peripheral structure). This is why we need a particular kind of JSJ decomposition, encoding
splittings over Zmax -subgroups.
    For any class A of subgroups of G, invariant under conjugation and stable under taking
subgroups, one can define JSJ decompositions over A [GL09]. In general, this defines a
deformation space, but in the cases we consider, this deformation space contains a preferred
canonical (i. e. Out(G)-invariant) decomposition, so we speak about the JSJ decomposition
over A. In a JSJ decomposition, one distinguishes between rigid and flexible vertex groups,
according to whether they are elliptic in all splittings of G over subgroups in A.
    We will discuss three possibilities for A: the class of virtually cyclic groups and their
subgroups, the class Z of virtually cyclic groups with infinite centre and their subgroups, and
the class Zmax of maximal Z-subgroups.
    The JSJ decomposition over virtually cyclic groups is now classical. It coincides with
Bowditch’s decomposition [Bow98] and has been widely studied [DS99, FP06], but we still
do not know whether it is computable. Its edge groups are virtually cyclic and its flexible
subgroups are hanging bounded Fuchsian groups, i. e. finite extensions of fundamental groups
of hyperbolic 2-orbifolds, possibly with mirrors.
    Over the class of Z-subgroups, the flexible subgroups of the JSJ decomposition are finite
extensions of fundamental groups of hyperbolic 2-orbifolds without mirrors, and edge groups
are Z-groups. Maybe surprisingly, this decomposition can be non-trivial for the fundamental
group G of a closed orbifold with mirrors. Indeed, we prove that the Z-JSJ decomposition
of an orbifold with mirrors is the splitting over the boundary of a regular neighbourhood of
the union of mirrors. The reason is that splittings over Z-subgroups of G are dual to simple
closed curves which don’t intersect the singular locus. One can state an interesting corollary
of this observation.

Corollary 4.1 (see also [Fuj02]). Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group, possibly with torsion


                                                5
(for instance, the fundamental group of a closed orbifold with mirrors Σ).
    Then there is a finite index subgroup Outf (G) of Out(G) which is an extension
                                                   n
                                                   Y
                        1 → Ab → Outf (Gv ) →            P M CG∗f (Si ) → 1
                                                   i=1

where Ab is virtually abelian, and P M CG∗f (Si ) is a finite index subgroup of the pure extended
mapping class group of a surface with boundary.
    Unfortunately, we are not able to compute algorithmically the JSJ decomposition over
Z, so we consider (a variant of) the JSJ decomposition over the class A = Zmax . This
decomposition is different from the more usual ones, and it should play a helpful role in order
to extend Sela’s program of elementary equivalence among hyperbolic groups to the case of
hyperbolic groups with torsion.
    As Zmax is not stable under taking subgroups, the JSJ decomposition over Zmax -subgroups
does not fit into the definition of JSJ decompositions from [GL09], but can nevertheless be
defined (see Section 4.4).
    Its rigid vertex groups are those with no Zmax -splitting relative to incident edge groups.
According to the rigidity criterion, they are those with finite outer automorphism group rel-
ative to incident edge groups. Its flexible vertices are orbisockets. These are finite extensions
of fundamental groups of 2-orbifolds without mirrors, whose boundary subgroups are amal-
gamated to larger Z-groups. A typical example consists in adding a root to a boundary
component as follows: the orbisocket group is Σ ∗b=ck hci where Σ is the fundamental group
of a surface with boundary, and hbi is the fundamental group of a boundary component.
    A key step in our proof consists in computing this JSJ decomposition over Zmax -subgroups.
To do so, one first computes a maximal decomposition Γ of G over Zmax -subgroups as ex-
plained above. In such a decomposition, an orbisocket is cut into pieces, called basic orbisock-
ets. One reconstructs the JSJ decomposition by first recognising the vertex groups of Γ which
are basic orbisockets, and by gluing together the pieces that match. This recognition is not
immediate, even in the torsion free case [DG08b]. The situation here is even more delicate,
and will occupy a significant part of the study.
    Once the Zmax JSJ decompositions of one-ended hyperbolic groups have been computed,
the isomorphism problem reduces to the isomorphism problem for the vertex groups (with
marked peripheral structures). A relative version of the isomorphism problem for rigid groups
(relative to marked peripheral structure) allows to do so for rigid vertex groups, and the iso-
morphism problem for orbisockets is easy once the basic orbisockets it is made of are identified.

    Let us comment the structure of the paper. We decided to include a rather extended
toolbox, in which we recall classical, but sometimes subtle, material, including elements of
Bass-Serre theory, and isomorphisms of graphs of groups. Section 3 is devoted to the rigid-
ity criterion, and its application to the isomorphism problem for rigid hyperbolic groups.
In Section 4, we introduce the definition and properties of the JSJ decompositions over Z
and Zmax -subgroups, and we introduce orbisockets as flexible vertices of the Zmax JSJ de-
composition. Sections 5 and 6 are mainly devoted to the computation of this Zmax JSJ
decomposition. The main part of section 5 is devoted to the recognition of basic orbisockets,
from which follows a solution of the isomorphism problem for orbisockets with their marked
peripheral structure. In section 6, we compute the Zmax JSJ decomposition by gluing to-
gether basic orbisockets of some non-canonical maximal decomposition, and we conclude our

                                               6
solution of the isomorphism problem for one-ended hyperbolic groups, Section 7 is devoted
to hyperbolic groups with several ends, and to the computation of the Stallings-Dunwoody
deformation space, and finishes the solution to the isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic
groups. Finally, in Section 8, we prove a relative version of the isomorphism problem, and we
deduce a solution of Whitehead problems.


Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                           1

2 Tool box                                                                                                8
  2.1 Actions of finitely generated groups on finite sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
  2.2 Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
  2.3 Algorithmic tools for hyperbolic groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        10
  2.4 Marked and unmarked peripheral structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          13
  2.5 Orbifolds and their mapping class groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         16
  2.6 Bounded Fuchsian groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
  2.7 Trees, graph of groups decompositions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
  2.8 Deformation spaces of trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      26
  2.9 Tree of cylinders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    27

3 Isomorphism problem for rigid hyperbolic groups                                                        29
  3.1 A rigidity criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
  3.2 Satisfiability of the criterion, and isomorphism problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         32

4 JSJ decompositions                                                                                     38
  4.1 Virtually-cyclic JSJ decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       39
  4.2 Z-JSJ decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      39
  4.3 Splittings over Zmax -subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      42
  4.4 JSJ decomposition over Zmax -subgroups: the tree TZmax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           44
  4.5 Orbisockets as flexible vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     45
  4.6 The orbisocket decomposition is canonical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        47

5 Isomorphism problem for orbisockets                                                                    49
  5.1 Recognition of basic orbisockets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     49
  5.2 Isomorphism problem for orbisockets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        57

6 Computation of the Zmax JSJ decomposition, and isomorphism problem for one-
  ended hyperbolic groups                                                                         58
  6.1 Computation of a maximal Zmax -splitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  58
  6.2 Computation of the JSJ tree TZmax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
  6.3 Isomorphism problem for one-ended hyperbolic groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     61

7 Groups with several ends                                                                               62

8 Whitehead problems                                                                                     64




                                                     7
2     Tool box
2.1   Actions of finitely generated groups on finite sets
Several times, we will use orbit decidability of group actions on finite sets. The following
lemma is rather elementary, but we need a somewhat general statement.

Lemma 2.1. (Orbit decidability in finite sets) Let G be a group acting on a finite set X, and
X̃ a set with a surjection π : X̃ → X on X. Assume that the following is known:

    • a finite generating set S of G,
    • an algorithm deciding whether two given elements of X̃ have same image in X.
    • an algorithm that, given x̃ ∈ X̃ and s ∈ S, computes an element ỹ ∈ X̃ with π(ỹ) =
      s.π(x̃),

Then given two elements in x̃, ỹ ∈ X̃, one can decide whether π(x̃) and π(ỹ) are in the same
orbit under the action of G. If they are in the same orbit, one can compute an element of G
(as a word on S ∪ S −1 ) sending π(x̃) to π(ỹ).
    Moreover, given x̃ ∈ X̃, one can compute a generating set of the stabiliser of π(x̃).

   Let us emphasize that the entire set X, and even its cardinality, is not assumed to be
known, that X̃ might be infinite, and that G does not act on X̃.

Proof. Consider x = π(x̃) and y = π(x̃). Let Bn (x) ⊂ X be the set of images of x under
elements of G of length at most n.
    By hypothesis, one can compute from x̃ representatives in X̃ of Bn (x). One can also check
whether y ∈ Bn (x) and check whether Bn (x) = Bn+1 (x). Since X is finite, Bn (x) = Bn+1 (x)
for some n, so Bn (x) = Gx since Bn (x) is invariant under the generators of G. One can
therefore check whether y lies in Gx. In this case, one easily finds a word of length ≤ n
sending x to y.
    Let’s compute generators for the stabiliser of x. The argument above allows one to com-
pute the Schreier graph Σ of the action of G on Gx: its vertex set is Gx and x, y are joined
by a directed edge labelled by s ∈ S if sx = y. One can obtain a set of generators of Stab(x)
by considering the words labelled by a generating set of π1 (Σ, x) (see also [MKS04, Theorem
2.7, p.89]).

2.2   Extensions
Let N be a fixed group, and 1 → N → E1 → G1 → 1, 1 → N → E2 → G2 → 1 some
extensions of G1 , G2 by N . We say that an isomorphism α : G1 → G2 lifts if there exists
ϕ : E1 → E2 making the following diagram commute:

                                      N          / E1      / G1

                                           idN         ϕ         α
                                                           
                                      N          / E2      / G2

(note that this requires the restriction of ϕ to be the identity on N ). Two extensions E1 , E2 of
the same group G by N are equivalent if idG lifts. We denote by E(G, N ) the set of equivalence
classes of extensions of G by N . Note that Aut(G) acts on the right on E(G, N ) as follows: if

                                                   8
   ι      π                                  ι     π◦α
N− →E−   → G is an extension, then N −  → E −−→ G is the new extension. This new extension
is equivalent to the original one if and only if α lifts.
    We will consider the case where N is finite. Given two groups G, N described via presenta-
tions, an extension 1 → N → E → G will be described algorithmically by a finite presentation
of E, a finite subgroup N ′ ⊳ E (described by the list of its elements, and a presentation), an
isomorphism N → N ′ , and a isomorphism between G and E/N ′ (a presentation of E/N ′ can
be deduced from the presentation of E by adding elements of N ′ as relators).

Lemma 2.2. Given two extensions E1 , E2 ∈ E(G, N ) of G by the same finite group N , and
solutions to the word problem in these groups, one can decide whether E1 , E2 are equivalent.
If they are, one can compute an isomorphism E1 → E2 realising the equivalence.

Proof. Using the given isomorphisms, we view N as a subgroup of E1 and E2 . Let S1 =
(s1 , . . . , sr ) be an ordered generating set of E1 , and S its image in G = E1 /N = E2 /N (recall
that we are given isomorphisms between Ei /N and G). Let S2 = (t1 , . . . , tr ) be a lift of S in
E2 (maybe generating or not). Since G is given as a quotient of E2 , one can compute such
S2 . Now E1 and E2 are equivalent if and only if there exists an isomorphism f : E1 → E2
inducing the identity on N , and sending (s1 , . . . , sr ) to (t1 n1 , . . . , tr nr ) where ni ∈ N . One
can tell if a mapping (s1 , . . . , sr ) 7→ (t1 n1 , . . . , tr nr ) extends a homomorphisms E1 → E2
using the presentation of E1 and a solution to the word problem in E2 . This way, we get the
list of all morphisms E1 → E2 sending (s1 , . . . , sr ) to (t1 n1 , . . . , tr nr ). One can similarly list
all morphisms E2 → E1 sending (t1 , . . . , tr ) to (s1 n′1 , . . . , sr n′r ). One can check if two such
morphisms are inverse of each other, and if their restriction to N is the identity using the
word problem.

Lemma 2.3. Let G be a finitely presented group, and N be a finite group. The set E(G, N )
is finite.

Proof. An equivalence class of extensions of G by N determines a morphism ψ : G → Out(N )
by conjugation. Such a morphism ψ induces a morphism G → Aut(Z(N )) which makes
the centre Z(N ) a G-module. By [Bro82, Theorem IV 6.6], the set of equivalence classes of
extensions of G by N inducing ψ : G → Out(N ), is either empty, or admits a free transitive
action by the abelian group H 2 (G, Z(N )). Since G is finitely presented, and Z(N ) is finite,
H 2 (G, Z(N )) is finite. Since there are only finitely many possible morphisms ψ, E(G, N ) is
itself finite.

Proposition 2.4. There is an algorithm that takes as input two finitely presented equivalence
classes of extensions E1 , E2 ∈ E(G, N ) of G by the same finite group N , a solution of the
word problem in E1 and E2 , and some automorphisms α1 , . . . , αn ∈ Aut(G) and which decides
whether E1 is in the orbit of E2 under the action of hα1 , . . . , αn i.
    Moreover, one can compute a generating set of the stabiliser of E1 under the action of
hα1 , . . . , αn i.

Proof. The previous lemma asserts that E(G, N ) is finite. By Lemma 2.2, we can compute
the action of hα1 , . . . , αn i on E(G, N ) in the sense of Lemma 2.1 (which does not require to
be able to enumerate E(G, N )), and thus decide whether E1 and E2 are in the same orbit or
not, and compute a generating set of the stabiliser of E1 .




                                                     9
2.3     Algorithmic tools for hyperbolic groups
2.3.1    Basic algorithms
Let G be a hyperbolic group. Given a finite presentation of G, one can compute a hyper-
bolicity constant δ of the property of δ-thin triangles ([Gro87, Pap96]). Let us remark that
there are many classical characterisations of hyperbolicity, where the constant slightly vary
when passing from a definition to another (see [CDP]); this is completely harmless since the
formulas for changing the constant are explicit. Many algorithms are explicitly defined from
a presentation of G and a hyperbolicity constant δ for this presentation. Since δ itself is
computable in terms of a presentation, one can view these algorithms as taking only a presen-
tation of G as input. These problems include the word problem, the conjugacy problem, and
more generally, the problem of satisfiability of finite systems of equations and inequations, see
[DG09]. Similarly, one can compute representatives of every conjugacy class of finite subgroup
of G since every such group has a conjugate consisting of elements of length at most 20δ; one
can also solve the root problem, i. e. determine whether an element is a proper power [Lys89].

Lemma 2.5. There is an algorithm that computes a set of generators of the centraliser, and
of the normaliser, of any given finite subgroup in a hyperbolic group.

Proof. Let F < G be a finite subgroup of a hyperbolic groups G. By [BH99, Proposition 3.9]
(and its proof, in [BH99, Proposition 4.15, pp. 477-478]), its centraliser is quasi-convex and
in fact, generated by elements of length bounded by an explicit constant, depending on the
hyperbolicity constant, and the length of the given elements. After trying all these elements
we obtain a generating set.
     Now the normaliser N of F maps to a subgroup N̄ of Aut(F ), with kernel the centraliser
of F . For each α ∈ Aut(F ), using a solution to the simultaneous conjugacy problem in G,
it is possible to check whether α ∈ N̄ , and if so, to find an element gα ∈ N inducing α. A
generating set of N is obtained by taking a generating set of the centraliser, and, for each
α ∈ N̄ , an element gα as found above.

    Let G be a hyperbolic group and hSi a finite generating set. Let (S ∪ S −1 )∗ be the free
monoid of all words on S ∪ S −1 , and π : (S ∪ S −1 )∗ → G the natural projection. A regular
language of (S ∪ S −1 )∗ is a subset recognised by a finite automaton.
    Recall that a (λ, µ)-quasigeodesic in a space (M, d) is a path p : [α, β] → M such that, for
all t, t′ ∈ [α, β] one has (1/λ)|t′ − t| − µ ≤ d(p(t), p(t′ )) ≤ λ|t′ − t| + µ.
    A word over the generators of a group labels a path in its Cayley graph. A word is said
quasi-geodesic if the labelled path is so.

Definition 2.6. A subset R ⊂ G is a quasi-isometrically embeddable rational subset if there
exist λ ≥ 1, µ ≥ 0 and a regular language R̃ ⊂ (S ∪ S −1 )∗ consisting of (λ, µ)-quasigeodesics
such that π(R̃) = R.

   Given a system of equation and inequations in G over the set of variables X, a set of
quasi-isometrically embeddable rational constraints is a family (Rx )x∈X of quasi-isometrically
embeddable rational languages indexed by the variables. A solution of the system of equations
and inequations with these rational constraints is a solution (gx ) ∈ GX of the system of
equations and inequations such that for all x ∈ X, gx ∈ Rx .
   We will use the following result from [DG09].


                                               10
Theorem 2.7. There is an explicit algorithm that, given a hyperbolic group, with a finite
system of equations, inequations, and quasi-isometrically embeddable rational constraints, de-
termines whether there is a solution or not.

2.3.2   Virtually cyclic groups and Z-groups
Because we will treat separately phenomenas related to finite groups, and to infinite virtually
cyclic groups, we make the convention that a virtually cyclic group is infinite by definition.
    Recall that a virtually cyclic group H can be written as an extension of exactly one of the
following two forms:
                               N ⊳ H ։ Z or N ⊳ H ։ D∞
where N is finite and D∞ = Z/2 ∗ Z/2 denotes the infinite dihedral group. In the first case,
it has infinite centre, we say that H is a Z-group. In the second case, H has finite centre and
we say that H is of dihedral type. Note that in both cases, N can be characterised as the
maximal finite normal subgroup of H.
    Given a group G, we denote by Z the family of its Z-subgroups, and by Zmax the family
of Z-subgroups of G which are maximal for the inclusion.
    Let G be a hyperbolic group. Given a virtually cyclic group H ⊂ G, there exists a unique
largest virtually cyclic subgroup V C(H) of G containing H (the stabiliser of the pair of points
fixed by H in the boundary). If H is a Z-group, there also exists a unique Zmax -subgroup
Zmax (H) ⊂ G containing H: this is the pointwise fixator of the same pair of points in the
boundary. It has index at most 2 in V C(H).
Lemma 2.8. There is an algorithm that given a finite set S ⊂ G,
   • decides whether hSi is virtually cyclic, and whether hSi is a Z-group

   • if hSi is virtually cyclic, it computes its maximal finite normal subgroup and a presen-
     tation of hSi

   • if hSi is virtually cyclic (resp. a Z-group), it computes V C(hSi) (resp. Zmax (hSi)) by
     giving a generating set, its maximal finite normal subgroup and a presentation, and in
     particular, it indicates whether hSi is Zmax .
Proof. In order to prove the two first points, we propose two algorithms, one of which will
terminate if hSi is virtually cyclic, will produce a presentation, a maximal finite normal
subgroup, and will indicates whether the group is a Z-group, and the other will terminate if
the group is non-virtually cyclic.
    As previously remarked, one can compute representatives of every conjugacy class of finite
subgroup. Then one can find a maximal finite subgroup N of G normalised by hSi. Indeed,
for each representative of finite group F , we can solve the disjunction of systems of equations
with one unknown x that states that ∀s ∈ S, (F x )s = F x . Consider the largest F for which
this has a solution x, then N = F x .
    Now one can easily check whether S ⊂ N or not. Hence, we assume that hSi is infinite.
Although it may happen that hSi does not contain N , its maximal finite normal subgroup
is contained in N , and one can obtain the list of subgroups of N that are normalised by the
elements of S.
    We now look for a generating set of hSi of the form M ∪ {g}, or M ∪ {g, σ} where M < N
is normalised by S, where g, σ ∈  / M , and where σ 2 ∈ M, (σgσg) ∈ M . This can be done, in

                                              11
parallel for each possible such M , by enumeration of the elements g, σ of hSi, and for each
family of elements, checking (using a solution to the word problem) whether it generates a
group containing S. This process must terminate if the group hSi is indeed virtually cyclic.
When it terminates, it shows hSi as a virtually cyclic group, provides the maximal finite
normal subgroup, and the quotient (note that g is necessarily of infinite order, otherwise hSi
would have been finite). In particular it determines whether hSi is a Z-group. Once N, g and
maybe σ have been determined, one easily computes a presentation of hSi.
     We now discuss the case where the enumeration above does not terminate. In this case
hSi must be non-elementary in G, and therefore it must contain a non-abelian free subgroup.
In particular there exists two elements g, h ∈ hSi such that [g2 , h2 ] ∈/ N . Note that this
cannot happen if hSi is virtually cyclic, since the quotient by hSi ∩ N would have a cyclic
subgroup of index 2. Since an enumeration process will find two such elements if they exists,
we obtain another algorithm that terminates if hSi is not virtually cyclic. This shows the two
first points of the lemma.
     For the third point, there are in principle three cases: first hSi = hM, gi is a Z-group,
and we look for Zmax (hSi); second, hSi = hM, gi is a Z-group, and we look for V C(hSi); and
third, hSi = hM, g, σi is not a Z-group and we look for V C(hSi). Since S normalizes N , the
group hS, N i is virtually cyclic, and N is the maximal finite normal subgroup of V C(hSi). If
additionnally hSi is a Z-group, then N is the maximal finite normal subgroup of Zmax (N, g).
     In any case, for each element n ∈ N , compute a maximal root hn of gn (i. e. a generator
of a maximal cyclic group containing gn) [Lys89] and kn > 0 such that hknn = gn. For n such
that kn is maximal, one has Zmax (hN, gi) = hN, hn i, which solves the first case. In the third
case, V C(hSi) = hM, hm , σi. To solve the second case, one checks the existence of σ ∈ G such
that σgσ −1 = gm for some n ∈ N . If it does not exist, V C(hSi) = Zmax (hSi) = hM, hn i, and
if it does, V C(hSi) = hM, hn , σi.

   We will also need algorithms concerning virtually cyclic groups.

Lemma 2.9.        1. There is an algorithm that, given a presentation of a Z-group, computes
     its (finite) automorphism group.
  2. There is an algorithm that, given two presentations of Z-groups, decides whether they
     are isomorphic, and lists the set of all isomorphisms between them.
  3. There is an algorithm that, given a presentation of a virtually cyclic group with finite
     centre, computes its (finite) outer automorphism group.
  4. There is an algorithm that, given two presentations of virtually cyclic groups with finite
     centre, decides whether they are isomorphic, and lists the set of all isomorphisms between
     them, up to inner automorphisms.

   Each isomorphism is described by giving for each generator, a word representing its image.
The meaning of the third statement is that one can produce a finite list of automorphisms of
G which is in bijection with the group of outer automorphisms of G.

Proof. Assertions 1 and 3 follow from assertions 2 and 4.
    Given virtually cyclic groups H1 , H2 , one can compute their maximal finite normal sub-
group Ni by the previous lemma. Let us also remark that we can easily deduce explicit
solutions to the word problem H1 , H2 .
    Being characteristic, we can assume that N1 ≃ N2 , and we can compute the finitely many
isomorphisms between them.


                                              12
     If Hi /Ni is infinite cyclic for i = 1, 2, then let ti ∈ Hi be a preimage of a generator of the
cyclic group Hi /Ni . Any isomorphism H1 → H2 is determined by the induced isomorphism
N1 → N2 and by the image of t1 , necessarily of the form t±1          2 n2 , for some n2 ∈ N2 . One
can check whether such a map extends to a morphism using the presentation of H1 and the
solution of the word problem in H2 . Any such morphism is clearly an isomorphism, so this
makes the list of all isomorphisms H1 → H2 . Using the solution of the word problem in H2 ,
we can remove repetitions in this list.
     If Hi /Ni is infinite dihedral for i = 1, 2, consider σi , τi ∈ Hi mapping to elements of order
2 generating Hi /Ni (one can find such elements by enumeration). Since any (unordered) pair
of elements of order 2 generating the infinite dihedral group is conjugate to the standard
one, any isomorphism H1 → H2 is conjugate to one sending {σ1 , τ1 } to {σ2 n2 , τ2 n′2 } for some
n2 , n′2 ∈ N2 . As above, one can extract from this list the mappings which extend to an
isomorphism, and remove repetitions using the simultaneous conjugacy problem in H2 .

2.4    Marked and unmarked peripheral structures
Let G be a group, and E be a class of finitely generated subgroups of G invariant under
automorphisms of G. Typically, E will be the class of finite subgroups, Z, or Zmax -subgroups.
If P is a group in E, we denote by [P ] its conjugacy class in G. An unmarked E-peripheral
structure on G is a finite unordered set P = {[P1 ], . . . , [Pp ]} of conjugacy classes of subgroups
Pi in E. When the context is clear, we just say peripheral structure instead of unmarked E-
peripheral structure. The groups Pi and their conjugates are called the peripheral subgroups.
Algorithmically, one represents an unmarked peripheral structure by choosing a generating
set of each Pi .
     In a graph of groups, each vertex group inherits a natural peripheral structure consisting
of the conjugacy classes of the images of the incident edge groups. This fundamental example
will be the source of most peripheral structures we will consider.
     Given G, G′ two groups with unmarked peripheral structures P = {[P1 ], . . . , [Pp ]} and
P = {[P1′ ], . . . , [Pp′ ′ ]}, an isomorphism ϕ : (G; P) → (G′ ; P ′ ) is an isomorphism ϕ : G → G′
  ′

such that {[ϕ(P1 )], . . . , [ϕ(Pp )]} = {[P1′ ], . . . , [Pp′ ′ ]} as unordered sets (in particular, p = p′ if
the [Pi ]’s and the [Pi′ ]’s are distinct). We denote by Autu (G; P) the group of automorphisms
of (G; P) (where u recalls that we are talking about an unmarked peripheral structure) i. e.
the subgroup of Aut(G) permuting the conjugacy classes of P1 , . . . , Pn . Of course, Autu (G; P)
contains all inner automorphisms, and we denote by Outu (G; P) its image in Out(G).
     If S = (s1 , . . . , sn ) ∈ Gn is a tuple, its conjugacy class [S] is the set of tuples (s′1 , . . . , s′n ) =
(s1 , . . . , sgn ) for some g ∈ G. We use the notation #S = n. A marked E-peripheral structure
   g

P = ([S1 ], . . . , [Sp ]) on G is a tuple of conjugacy classes of tuples S1 ∈ Gn1 , . . . , Sp ∈ Gnp , such
that hSi i lies in E. When the context is clear, we also just say peripheral structure instead of
marked E-peripheral structure.
     Given G, G′ two groups with marked peripheral structures P = ([S1 ], . . . , [Sp ]) and P ′ =
([S1′ ], . . . , [Sp′ ]), an isomorphism (resp. a homomorphism) ϕ : (G; P) → (G′ ; P ′ ) is an isomor-
phism (resp. a homomorphism) ϕ : G → G′ such that [ϕ(Si )] = [Si′ ] for all i = 1, . . . , p, i. e.
such that ϕ(Si ) = Si′ gi for some gi ∈ G′ . The groups hSi i and their conjugates are also called
the peripheral subgroups of P. We denote by Autm (G; P) the group of automorphisms of
(G; P) (where the subscript m recalls that we are talking about a marked peripheral struc-
ture), i. e. the subgroup of Aut(G) which maps each Si to a conjugate, i. e. whose restriction
to hSi i is the conjugation by some element of G. As above, Autm (G; P) contains all inner


                                                        13
automorphisms, and we denote by Outm (G; P) its image in Out(G).
    A marked peripheral structure Pm = ([S1 ], . . . , [Sp ]) naturally induces an unmarked pe-
ripheral structure Pu = {[hS1 i], . . . , [hSp i]}. We also say that Pm is a marking of Pu . Note
that Autm (G; Pm ) ⊂ Autu (G; Pu ).

Lemma 2.10. Let (G, Pm ) be a group with marked peripheral structure Pm = (S1 , . . . , Sp ).
Let Pu = {[hS1 i], . . . , [hSp i]} be the induced unmarked peripheral structure.
    If Out(hSi i) is finite for all i then Outm (G, Pm ) has finite index in Outu (G, Pu ).

   This applies in particular if peripheral subgroups are virtually cyclic or finite. Then
Outm (G, Pm ) is finitely generated if and only if Outu (G, Pu ) is.

Proof. The marked peripheral structure Pm = (S1 , . . . , Sp ), can be viewed as an element of
M = (G#S1 ×· · ·×G#Sp )/Gp where Gp acts on each factor by conjugation. Let Markings(Pu ) ⊂
M be the set of marked peripheral structures inducing the unmarked peripheral structure
Pu . Outu (G, Pu ) acts on Markings(Pu ), and since Out(hSi i) is finite, each orbit is finite.
Since Outm (G, Pm ) is the stabilizer of an element of Markings(Pu ), it has finite index in
Outu (G, Pu ).

Definition 2.11 (Extended isomorphism problem). Consider a class G of groups with un-
marked (resp. marked) peripheral structures, such that Outu (G, P) (resp. Outm (G, P)) is
finitely generated for all (G, P) ∈ G. Then the extended isomorphism problem for G consists
of the two following problems:

  1. given (G, P), (G′ , P ′ ) ∈ G, decide whether (G, P) ≃ (G′ , P ′ )

  2. given (G, P) ∈ G, compute a finite generating set of Outu (G, P) (resp. of Outm (G, P)).

Remark 2.12. What we mean in the second assertion, is computing a finite subset in Aut(G)
(each automorphism being encoded by giving a word representing the image of each genera-
tor), whose image generates Outu (G, P) (resp. Outm (G, P)). Clearly, computing a generating
set for Outu (G, P) (resp. of Outm (G, P)) is equivalent to computing a generating set for
Autu (G, P) (resp. of Autm (G, P)).

Lemma 2.13. Let E be the class of finite or virtually cyclic groups. Let Gu be a class
of groups with unmarked E-peripheral structures, with Outu (G, Pu ) finitely generated for all
(G, Pu ) ∈ Gu . Let Gm be the class of groups with marked E-peripheral structures whose induced
unmarked peripheral structure lies in Gu .
    Assume that for groups in Gu , we have a solution of the simultaneous conjugacy problem,
and for subgroups in E, we can find a presentation from a generating system.
    Then the extended isomorphism problem is solvable for Gu if and only if it is solvable for
Gm .

Proof. Note that Outm (G, Pm ) is finitely generated for all (G, Pm ) ∈ Gm by Lemma 2.10.
     Assume that the extended isomorphism problem is solvable for unmarked peripheral struc-
tures. Consider (G, Pm ), (G′ , Pm
                                 ′ ) ∈ G , and we want to decide whether (G, P ) ≃ (G′ , P ′ ).
                                         m                                        m               m
                      ′
We denote by Pu , Pu be the unmarked peripheral structure defined by Pm , Pm         ′ . We can

decide whether (G, Pu ) ≃ (G′ , Pu′ ), and we can assume that it is the case. Using some isomor-
phism f between (G, Pu ) and (G′ , Pu′ ) (one can compute one by enumeration), we can define
Pm′′ = f −1 (P ′ ) a marked peripheral structure of G inducing P . Write P
              m                                                      u          m = (S1 , . . . , Sp )


                                                 14
and Pm   ′′ = (S ′′ , . . . , S ′′ ) where can assume #S = #S ′′ . Using the notations of the proof of
                  1             p                         i      i
Lemma 2.10, Pm , Pm           ′′ are elements of Markings(P ), and we have to decide whether they are
                                                             u
in the same orbit under Outu (G, Pu ). We can compute some generating set Su of Outu (G, Pu ).
Since Out(hSi i) is finite for all i, the orbit of Pm and Pm       ′′ in Markings(P ) are finite. Using
                                                                                      u
the simultaneous conjugacy problem, one can decide whether two tuples represent the same
element of Markings(Pu ). Applying Lemma 2.1 to X consisting of the union of these two
orbits, one can decide whether these orbits coincide, and compute a system of generators of
Outm (G; P). This concludes the proof of the first implication.
     Conversely, assume that the extended isomorphism problem is solvable for marked periph-
eral structures. Consider (G, Pu ), (G′ , Pu′ ) ∈ Gu , and we want to decide whether (G, Pu ) ≃
(G′ , Pu′ ). We first note that we can decide when two subgroups hSi, hS ′ i in the class E are
conjugate. Indeed one can find a presentation of these groups by hypothesis, and one can list
all isomorphisms hSi → hS ′ i up to conjugacy by Lemma 2.9, and then solve the simultaneous
conjugacy problem to check whether such an isomorphism is induced by a conjugation. This
way, we can decide which peripheral subgroups in Pu (resp. in Pu′ ) are conjugate to each other
in G (resp. in G′ ), and remove redundant conjugacy classes. Write Pu = {[P1 ], . . . , [Pp ]} and
Pu′ = {[P1′ ], . . . , [Pp′ ]} (we can assume that #Pu = #Pu′ ). Choose a generating system Si of
Pi . This defines a marked peripheral structure Pm inducing Pu . Compute presentations of
each peripheral subgroup. For each permutation σ of {1, . . . , n}, make a list of all conjugacy
classes of isomorphisms fi : Pi → Pσ(i)        ′  (Lemma 2.9). For each such choice of σ and of isomor-
                            ′
phisms fi , define Si = fi (Si ), and let Pm      ′ be the corresponding marked peripheral structure of
  ′                                 ′  ′
G . Then (G, Pu ) ∼ (G , Pu ) if and only if (G, Pm ) ∼ (G′ , Pm        ′ ) for some choice, which solves

the unmarked isomorphism problem. Computing a generating set of Outu (G, Pu ) is similar:
fix a marking Pm of Pu as above, and consider all other markings Pm              ′ corresponding to some

permutation σ and isomorphisms fi . One can decide if (G, Pm ) ≃ (G, Pm              ′ ), and in this case,

find an isomorphism α. Such α lies in Outu (G, Pu ), and adding all those elements α to a
generating set of Outm (G, Pm ) gives a generating set of Outu (G, Pu ).

Lemma 2.14. Let G be a class of hyperbolic groups groups with marked peripheral structures
whose peripheral subgroups are infinite, and for which the extended isomorphism problem is
solvable. Let GF be the class of groups (G, P ∪ Q) with marked peripheral structures such that
(G, P) ∈ G, and all peripheral subgroups in Q are finite.
    Then the extended isomorphism problem is solvable for GF .

Proof. Consider (G; P ∪ Q), (G′ ; P ′ ∪ Q′ ) ∈ GF . Since peripheral subgroups of P are infinite
and since those of Q are finite, (G; P ∪ Q) ≃ (G′ ; P ′ ∪ Q′ ) implies #P = #P ′ , #Q = #Q′
and (G; P) ≃ (G′ ; P ′ ). One can decide whether (G; P) ≃ (G′ , P ′ ), and we can assume that
this is the case. Moreover, one can compute a finite generating set of Out(G, P).
    Consider f : G → G′ an isomorphism sending P to P ′ (one can construct such f by enu-
meration and using the simultaneous conjugacy problem). Let Q′′ = f −1 (Q′ ) be the pullback
of the marked peripheral structure. Denote by Q = (S1 , . . . , Sp ) and Q′′ = (S1′′ , . . . , Sp′′ ) the
marked peripheral structures. Let Periph be the following set of marked peripheral structures:
Periph is set of tuples (Σ1 , . . . , Σp ) ∈ M = (G#S1 × · · · × G#Sp )/Gp such that #hSi i < ∞.
The simultaneous conjugacy problem allows one to decide when two tuples represent the
same marked peripheral structure. We view Q and Q′′ as two elements of Periph. Then
(G; P ∪ Q) ≃ (G′ ; P ′ ∪ Q′ ) if and only if Q is in the same orbit as Q′′ under the natural action
of Out(G, P) on Periph.


                                                    15
    Since G has only finitely many conjugacy classes of finite subgroups, Periph is finite. Since
we know a generating set of Out(G, P), the orbits of its action on Periph can be computed by
Lemma 2.1. Computing a system of generators of Outm (G; P ∪ Q) also follows from Lemma
2.1.

2.5   Orbifolds and their mapping class groups
Consider Σ a 2-orbifold with boundary, whose fundamental group is not virtually abelian
(hence it is hyperbolic). We assume that Σ is of conical type, i. e. that all its singularities
are cone points (in other words Σ has no mirrors). The boundary subgroups of Σ define an
unmarked peripheral structure B of π1 (Σ). Choosing an ordering of the boundary components
and a generator of each peripheral subgroup, we obtain a corresponding marked peripheral
structure Bm . The group Autu (π1 (Σ); B) is the group of automorphisms of π1 (Σ) preserving
the conjugacy class of the peripheral subgroups, and Autm (π1 (Σ); B) is its subgroup sending
each generator of a boundary subgroup to a conjugate of itself.
    Let Σ0 be the surface underlying Σ, with a marked point at each conical singularity, this
point carrying a weight corresponding to the order of its isotropy group in Σ. Let us denote
by M CG∗ (Σ) the group of isotopy classes of homeomorphisms h of Σ0 and preserving the
weights of the marked points. This is an extended mapping class group since we don’t assume
h to preserve the orientation (which makes sense only if Σ is orientable). Homeomorphisms
and isotopies are not required to be the identity on boundary components of Σ0 . On the
other hand, we define P M CG∗ (Σ) (where P stands for pure) as the subgroup of M CG∗ (G)
of isotopy classes of homeomorphisms whose restriction to each boundary component b maps
b to itself, preserving the orientation of b. Note that we still don’t assume that h preserves
the orientation (when Σ is orientable) although this is necessarily the case if the boundary of
Σ is non-empty. Any h ∈ M CG∗ (Σ) (resp. in P M CG∗ (Σ)) induces an outer automorphism
of π1 (Σ0 ) preserving the unmarked (resp. marked) peripheral structure.

Proposition 2.15. The morphisms described above induce isomorphisms

           M CG∗ (Σ) −∼
                      → Outu (π1 (Σ); B),        P M CG∗ (Σ) −∼
                                                              → Outm (π1 (Σ); Bm ).

In particular, we have extensions

                       1 → π1 (Σ) → Autu (π1 (Σ); B) → M CG∗ (Σ) → 1

                     1 → π1 (Σ) → Autm (π1 (Σ); Bm ) → P M CG∗ (Σ) → 1.

    We give references. The isomorphism is due to Dehn, Nielsen and Baer for closed oriented
surface groups, and was generalised by Magnus and Zieschang for surfaces with boundary,
by Maclachlan and Harvey for orientable orbifolds with conical singularities and boundaries
[MH75, Theorem 1], and by Fujiwara [Fuj02, sec.3, p.281], for the non-orientable case (these
authors consider the unmarked case, the marked case is similar). Maclachlan and Harvey also
observed in [MH75, Corollary 3] that in the definition of the mapping class group, one can
replace boundary components by marked points (of infinite weight).
    Recall that the extended isomorphism problem consists in solving the isomorphism prob-
lem, and in computing generators of the corresponding automorphism groups (Definition
2.11).


                                               16
Proposition 2.16. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for the class of pairs
(π1 (Σ), B) where Σ is a compact 2-orbifold of conical type whose fundamental group is not vir-
tually abelian, and B is the unmarked peripheral structure defined by its boundary subgroups.

Proof. An explicit generating system for M CG∗ (Σ) can be obtained from Lickorish [Lic64]
in the orientable case, and Korkmaz [Kor02] (see also Chillingworth [Chi69]) in the non-
orientable case. One can compute the effect of this generating system on a generating system
of π1 (Σ), and thus obtain a generating set for Outu (π1 (Σ); B). The isomorphism problem
among orbifold groups is solved as follows: each orbifold group has a standard presentation
(with a corresponding peripheral structure) on which on can read the topology of the orbifold.
Starting from an arbitrary presentation of an orbifold group, using Tietze transformation, one
will find such a standard presentation, in which one can decide if the given peripheral structure
coincide with the standard one. This procedure will terminate sometime, which solves the
unmarked extended isomorphism problem.

   By Lemma 2.13, the same statement holds in the marked case.

2.6   Bounded Fuchsian groups
Following [Bow98], we call bounded Fuchsian group a non-elementary finitely generated group
G0 having a proper discontinuous action by isometries without parabolics on H2 . We don’t
ask for the action to be faithful, the kernel may be a finite group. Equivalently, a bounded
Fuchsian group is a finite extension of a non-elementary convex co-compact discrete subgroup
of P SL2 (R). Note that the kernel F of the action of G0 on H2 is the largest finite normal
subgroup of G0 .
    The quotient G0 = G0 /F is the fundamental group of the orbifold K/G0 where K ⊂ H2
is the convex core of G0 . We call G0 the orbifold group of G0 .
    We say that G0 is without reflection if no element of G0 acts as a reflection on H2 , i. e. if
the quotient orbifold has no mirror. We also say that G0 is of conical type in this case.
    The stabiliser of a boundary component of K is called a boundary subgroup. Boundary
subgroups are virtually cyclic subgroups of G0 , and Z-subgroups if G0 is without reflection.
The set of boundary subgroups consists of finitely many conjugacy classes of virtually cyclic
subgroups B1 , . . . , Bn , which defines an unmarked peripheral structure of G0 . This peripheral
structure is empty if and only if G0 acts cocompactly on H2 . We will mostly work with a
marked peripheral structure B inducing this unmarked peripheral structure (see section 2.4
for definitions).
    We will need a solution to the marked isomorphism problem for bounded Fuchsian groups
with a marking of their natural peripheral structure. Recall that we represent algorithmically
the groups G, G′ by some presentations, and the marked peripheral structures Pm , Pm         ′ by

tuples of words in the generators.

Proposition 2.17. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for bounded Fuchsian group
without reflection. More precisely:
    There is an explicit algorithm that takes as input two bounded Fuchsian groups (G1 ; B1 ),
(G2 ; B2 ) without reflection with marked peripheral structure, and decides whether (G1 ; B1 ) ≃
(G2 ; B2 ).
    Moreover, there is an algorithm that, given a bounded Fuchsian group (G, B) with a marked
peripheral structure, computes a set of generators for the group Autm (G; B).


                                               17
Proof. Let N1 , N2 be the (unique) maximal finite normal subgroups of the two bounded
                                                                           i              ji       π
Fuchsian groups G1 , G2 . Let Gi = Gi /Ni , so we have 1 → Ni −      → Gi −→  Gi → 1. Since the
finite groups Ni can be computed, one can find a presentation of Gi .
                                                       (i)          (i)
    Denote the marked peripheral structures by Bi = (S1 , . . . , Sp ). We can obviously assume
                                                                   (1)     (2)
that B1 and B2 have the same number p of tuples, and that #Si = #Si for all i = 1, . . . , p
                                 ′ ). Whether the order preserving map S (1) → S (2) extends
as otherwise, (G; Bm ) 6≃ (G′ ; Bm                                           j       j
                                       (1)         (2)
to an isomorphism ϕj : hSj i → hSj i can be checked (see Lemma 2.8 and 2.9), so we can
assume that ϕj exists.
    Since the peripheral subgroups are Zmax , they contain the normal finite group Ni , and
the quotient is cyclic. Denote by B i the image of Bi in Gi . Of course, any isomorphism
ϕ : (G1 ; B1 ) → (G2 ; B2 ) sends N1 to N2 and induces an isomorphism ϕ : (G1 , B 1 ) → (G2 , B 2 ).
    By Proposition 2.16, we can determine if there exists an isomorphism ϕ : (G1 , B 1 ) →
(G2 , B 2 ), and produce one if it exists. If there is no such isomorphism, we are done. Still
using Proposition 2.16, compute a generating set of Autm (G1 , B 1 ).
    We list all isomorphisms ν : N1 → N2 , and for each of them, we look for isomorphisms
ϕ : G1 → G2 which coincide with ν on N1 . In a first step, we don’t ask ϕ to preserve the
peripheral structures.
Lemma 2.18. One can decide whether there exists an isomorphism ϕ′ : G1 → G2 whose
restriction to N1 is ν, and such that the induced isomorphism ϕ′ : G1 → G2 maps the marked
peripheral structure B1 to B 2 . We can find such a ϕ′ if it exists.
    Moreover, one can construct a generating set of the group Aut0 (G1 ) of all automorphisms
of G1 whose restriction to N1 is the identity, and whose induced automorphism on G1 pre-
serves B1 .

Proof. We already have an isomorphism ϕ : (G1 , B 1 ) → (G2 , B 2 ). One has to decide the
existence of α ∈ Autm (G1 , B1 ), such that ϕ ◦ α lifts to a isomorphism ϕ′ : G1 → G2 whose
restriction to N1 is ν. The isomorphisms ϕ, and ν allow us to view G2 as an extension of
                               j2 ◦ν         ϕ−1 ◦π2
G1 by N1 : 1 → N1 −−−→ G2 −−−−−→ G1 , and we are asking whether the two extensions
G1 , G2 ∈ E(G1 , N1 ) are in the same orbit under the action of Autm (G1 , B 1 ) (see Section 2.2).
Since we have computed a generating set of Autm (G1 , B 1 ), Proposition 2.4 allows us to decide
whether this holds or not, and gives such α if it exists. One finds a lift of ϕ ◦ α inducing ν by
trying all possibilities as in Proposition 2.4.
    The same proposition gives a generating set of the stabiliser of the extension G1 under the
action of Autm (G1 , B 1 ). By listing all lifts to G1 of this generating set, one gets a generating
set of Aut0 (G1 ).

    If no isomorphism ϕ′ as in Lemma 2.18 exists, we are done. Otherwise, we now modify ϕ′
to ensure that it preserves the peripheral structures.
                 (1)                                                                     (2)
    Fix Sj = Sj = (s1 , . . . , sr ) ∈ Gr1 a tuple of B1 , and Sj′ = Sj ∈ Gr2 be the corresponding
                               r
tuple of B2 . Let S j ∈ G1 be the image of Sj in G1 and Xj = s1 N1 × · · · × sr N1 ⊂ Gr1 be the
finite set of tuples in Gr1 whose image in G1 is S j . Let ∼j be the equivalence relation on Xj
defined by (t1 , . . . , tr ) ∼ (t′1 , . . . , t′r ) if and only if (t1 , . . . , tr ) = (t′1 g , . . . , t′r g ) for some g ∈ G1 .
Note that Aut0 (G1 ) acts on Xj / ∼j . Indeed, since any ψ ∈ Aut0 (G1 ) preserves the marked
peripheral structure B1 on G1 , there exists g ∈ G1 such that ψ(Sj )g ∈ Xj , and its equivalence
class in Xj / ∼j does not depend on the choice of g.


                                                               18
     Since ϕ′ preserves marked peripheral structures, there exists g ∈ G1 such that ϕ′−1 (Sj′ )g ∈
Xj , (and the choice of g does not change the class of Sj′ modulo ∼j ).
     The existence of an isomorphism ϕ′′ : (G1 , B1 ) → (G2 , B2 ) is equivalent to the existence of
ψ ∈ Aut0 (G1 ) mapping Sj to Sj′ in Xj / ∼j for all j. Indeed, if ϕ′′ exists then ψ = ϕ′−1 ϕ′′ ∈
Aut0 (G1 ) sends Sj to Sj′ in Xj / ∼j , and conversely, if ψ sends Sj to Sj′ in Xj / ∼j , then one
can take ϕ′′ = ϕ′ ψ.
     Since the simultaneous Q conjugacy problem is solvable, the equivalence relation ∼j and
the action of Aut0 (G1 ) on j Xj / ∼j are computable. Since we know a generating set for
Aut0 (G1 ), Lemma 2.1 allows us to decide the existence of ψ, and proves the first assertion
                                                                                     (1)      (1)
Q the proposition. The same lemma allows us to compute the stabiliser of (S1 , . . . , Sr ) ∈
of
   j Xj / ∼j which is exactly Autm (G1 ; B1 ). This ends the proof of Proposition 2.17.


2.7     Trees, graph of groups decompositions
2.7.1    Generalities
A G-tree is a simplicial tree endowed with an action of G. All actions are supposed to be
without inversion: no edge is mapped to itself reversing the orientation. A G-tree is non-
trivial if no point of T is fixed by G, and minimal if T has no proper G-invariant subtree.
All G-trees considered are minimal, unless otherwise mentioned. If (G; P) is a peripheral
structure of G, then an action of the pair (G; P) on a tree (or an action of G relative to P)
is a G-tree such that all peripheral subgroups of P are elliptic (i. e. fix a point) in T . This
makes sense whether P is a marked or unmarked peripheral structure.
    A G-tree T is irreducible if it is non-trivial, and no end and no line of T is G-invariant (in
other words T is not abelian and not dihedral). If G is hyperbolic, and not virtually cyclic,
any non-trivial G-tree with elementary edge stabiliser is irreducible [Pau89, Prop. 2.6].
    We identify two G-trees if there is a G-equivariant isomorphism between T and T ′ . Equiv-
alently, this means that T and T ′ have the same length function [AB87, CM87].
    If E is a class of subgroups of G (e.g. the class Z), we say that a G-tree with edge
stabilisers in E is an E-tree.

2.7.2    Bass-Serre theory
We first recall some classical material, but we hope that stating this will help to clarify certain
issues.
     We use Serre’s notations for graphs [Ser77]: a graph X consists of a vertex set V (X), a
set of oriented edges E(X) endowed with the fixed-point free involution e 7→ e reversing the
orientation of an edge, and t : E(X) → V (X) a map assigning to an oriented edge its terminal
vertex. The origin o(e) of an edge e is t(e).
     A graph of groups consists of a graph X, a vertex group Γv for each v ∈ V (X), an
edge group Γe for each e ∈ E(X) with Γe = Γe , and for each e ∈ E(X), a monomorphism
ie : Γe → Γt(e) . If Γ is a graph of groups, we often, by a slight abuse of notation, denote by Γ
the underlying graph.
     The Bass group B(Γ) of Γ is the free product of the vertex groups and of the free group
on E(Γ) subject to the relations
   • e = e−1 for all e ∈ E(Γ)
   • eie (g)e−1 = ie (g) for all e ∈ E(Γ) and g ∈ Γe .

                                                19
An element of the Bass group is a path from v to w if it is of the form g0 e1 g1 . . . en gn where
e1 . . . en is a path in the graph Γ joining v to w and gi ∈ Γt(ei ) = Γo(ei+1 ) .
     The fundamental group π1 (Γ, v), where v ∈ V (Γ) is a base point, is by definition the
subgroup of B(Γ) consisting of elements which are paths from v to v. Given a base point
v ∈ Γ, there is a universal covering Γ̃ (which is called the Bass-Serre tree of (Γ, v)) endowed
with an action of π1 (Γ, v). If p ∈ B(Γ) is a path from w to v, the map ϕp : π1 (Γ, v) → π1 (Γ, w)
defined by g 7→ pgp−1 is an isomorphism which induces a ϕp -equivariant isomorphism between
the universal coverings of Γ relative to v and w.
     If G is a group, a marking of π1 (Γ, v) is an isomorphism µ : π1 (Γ, v) → G. This marking
defines an action of G on the universal cover Γ̃ (relative to the base point v). Allowing to
change the marking by some isomorphism ϕp , one can suppress the reference to a base point,
and the marking is only defined up to the choice of a base point and composition by an inner
automorphism. Since these operations do not change the action G y Γ̃ up to equivariant
isometry, we make the abuse of saying that a marking is an isomorphism µ : π1 (Γ) → G
(without reference to a base point).
     If τ ⊂ E(Γ) is a maximal subtree, the fundamental group π1 (Γ, τ ) is the quotient of B(Γ)
by the edges occurring τ . The composition π1 (Γ, v) ֒→ B(Γ) ։ π1 (Γ, τ ) is an isomorphism,
see [Ser77, Chap. 1 Prop. 20].
     Convention about notations We choose to write G for a group, and keep the letter Γ for
graphs of groups. However, by convention, in a graph of groups Γ, the symbols Γv , Γe will
denote the groups of the vertex v, of the edge e. But, if a group G acts on a tree, the stabiliser
of a vertex v will be denoted by Gv .

     Given a G-tree, the graph X = T /G can be endowed with a structure of a graph of groups
Γ as follows. For each x ∈ V (X) ∪ E(X), choose a lift x̃ in T , so that ẽ = ẽ. Contrary to
[Ser77], we don’t assume the connectedness of the lift of X, we rather choose arbitrary lifts
of edges and vertices. For all e ∈ E, consider v = t(e), then there exists he ∈ G such that
he .t(ẽ) = ṽ. For all x ∈ E(X) ∪ V (X), we define Γx = Gx̃ < G as the stabiliser of x̃, and ie
as the restriction to Γẽ of the inner automorphism adhe : g 7→ he gh−1
                                                                      e .
     Given these choices, there is a morphism µ : B(Γ) → G defined by its value on its
generating set as follows: µ is defined on Γv as the inclusion in G, and for each edge e ∈ E(Γ),
µ(e) = he h−1 e . The restriction of µ to π1 (Γ, v) is an isomorphism to G [Bas93, Section 3.3]
(where the proof there is given only in the case the lift of Γ is a tree). Moreover, to the
marking µ corresponds a µ-equivariant isomorphism µ̃ : Γ̃ → T .
     The graph of groups Γ and the marking depend on choices of the lifts x̃ of all x ∈
V (X) ∪ E(X), of the elements he ∈ G, and of the base point v ∈ V (X). But of course, the
action of G on Γ̃ induced by µ does not depend on choices up to equivariant isometry since
it is isomorphic to G y T .
     Algorithmically, one describes a graph of groups by a presentation of edge and vertex
groups, and the monomorphisms ie by the images of the generators of Ge . One can compute
a presentation of π1 (Γ, v) using the isomorphism with π1 (Γ, τ ). One describes an action of G
on a tree up to G-equivariant isomorphism by giving a graph of groups Γ, and an isomorphism
π1 (Γ, v) → G.




                                               20
2.7.3   Isomorphisms of graph of groups
All graph of groups are supposed to be minimal and irreducible (i. e. their Bass-Serre trees
are assumed to be so).

Definition 2.19. An isomorphism Φ = (F, (ϕe ), (ϕv ), (γe )) of graph of groups is a graph
isomorphism F : Γ → Γ′ , a collection of isomorphisms ϕe : Γe → Γ′F (e) and ϕv : Γv → Γ′F (v)
for all e ∈ E(Γ) and all v ∈ V (Γ), and a collection elements γe ∈ Γ′F (t(e)) for all e ∈ E(Γ),
such that ϕe = ϕe and such that the following diagram commutes:

                                                          ie
                                   Γe                                      / Γv

                                         ϕe                                         ϕv
                                             iF (e)              adγe
                                                                                
                                  Γ′F (e)              / Γ′
                                                          F (v)
                                                                         / Γ′
                                                                            F (v)


where v = t(e).

Remark. Bass’ definition of an isomorphism of graphs of groups is more general than ours as
it also involves elements (γv )v∈V (Γ) in the Bass group [Bas93]. In terms of Bass’ notations,
we work only with morphisms of the form δΦ, where Φ is a morphism in Bass sense, δΦ being
defined in [Bas93, 2.9]. Lemma 2.22 below shows that any tree isomorphism is induced by
some Φ as in our definition.
    Such an isomorphism of graphs of groups Φ : Γ → Γ′ induces an isomorphism ΦB of the
Bass groups defined on the generating set of B(Γ) as follows: on Γv , ΦB is defined as ϕv ,
and ΦB (e) = γe−1 F (e)γe for e ∈ E(Γ). The restriction of ΦB induces an isomorphism of
fundamental groups Φ∗ : π1 (Γ, v) → π1 (Γ′ , F (v)). Note however that ΦB does not usually
factor into a map π1 (Γ, τ ) → π1 (Γ′ , F (τ )).

Lemma 2.20 ([Bas93, §2.3]). An isomorphism of graphs of groups Φ induces a Φ∗ -equivariant
isomorphism of the universal coverings Φ̃ : Γ̃ → Γ̃′ .
   Moreover, if all vertex and edge groups are finitely presented, one can algorithmically
compute Φ∗ from Φ.

Proof. Given [Bas93, §2.3], we only need to show that Φ∗ : π1 (Γ, v) → π1 (Γ′ , F (v)) can be
algorithmically computed. One can easily compute explicit presentation of π1 (Γ, v) and of
the Bass group B(Γ), and can compute the embedding π1 (Γ, v) in B(Γ) (by giving the image
of the generators). One can also easily compute the image by ΦB (hence by Φ∗ ) of the
generators of π1 (Γ, v), in B(Γ′ ) (in fact we know that their image are in π1 (Γ′ , F (v)), but
they are not expressed in terms of the generators of this group yet). Since B(Γ) is finitely
presented, one can enumerate the different expressions of a given element. This allows us to
eventually express the images by Φ∗ of the generators of π1 (Γ, v) in terms of the generators
of π1 (Γ′ , F (v)).

Remark 2.21. Let Γ be a graph of groups, and Γ′ be the graph of groups with the same
underlying graph, the same edge and vertex groups as Γ but whose edge morphisms are
defined by i′e = adγe ◦ ie for some γe ∈ Γt(e) . Then Γ and Γ′ are isomorphic under Φ =
(idΓ , idGe , idGv , γe ). In other words, changing the conjugacy classes of the edge morphisms of
Γ does not change the dual tree up to the change of marking above.


                                                          21
   The lemma below shows that conversely, an isomorphism of trees is always induced by a
(not uniquely defined) isomorphism of graph of groups.

Lemma 2.22 ([Bas93, Bass, Prop 4.]). Any equivariant isomorphism of trees induces an
automorphism of graph of groups. More precisely one has the following.
    Let G y T and G′ y T ′ be two minimal irreducible actions on trees. Let Γ, Γ′ be the
corresponding quotient graphs of groups corresponding to some choices, and µ : π1 (Γ, v) → G,
µ′ : π1 (Γ′ , v ′ ) → G′ , µ̃ : Γ̃ → T , µ̃′ : Γ̃′ → T ′ the corresponding marking.
    If ϕ : G → G′ is an isomorphism, and f : T → T ′ is a ϕ-equivariant isomorphism, then,
after performing a change of marking induced by a path p ∈ B(Γ′ ), there exists an isomorphism
Φ from Γ to Γ′ inducing ϕ and f in the sense that the following diagrams commute (for the
new markings):
                                              ϕ                                           f
                                  GO                    / G′                        TO         / T′
                                                           O                                      O
                                 µ                     µ̃′                         µ̃          µ̃′
                                             Φ∗                                           Φ̃
                              π̃1 (Γ, v)          / π1 (Γ′ , F (v))                 Γ̃          / Γ̃′

    Applying the Lemma to the case T = T ′ , we see that changing the choices (of lifts and
of elements he ) needed to define the quotient graph of groups does not change the graph of
groups, up to isomorphism and change of base point.

Proof. The given reference [Bas93, Proposition 4.4] says that there exists such a morphism
Φ, but in the more general definition of an automorphism used in [Bas93]. We use Bass’
notations. We prove that δΦ (which satisfies our definition of a isomorphism of graph of
groups) still satisfies the Lemma.
                              ˜ be the Φ∗ -equivariant (resp. δΦ∗ ) isometry induced by Φ (resp.
    Let Φ̃ : Γ̃ → Γ̃′ (resp. δΦ)
                −1 ˜
δΦ). Then Φ̃ δΦ is a Φ∗ δΦ∗ -equivariant automorphism of T . By [BJ96, 6.3(6)], Φ−1
                             −1
                                                                                            ∗ δΦ∗
is an inner automorphism, say adg . Up to changing the marking of Γ′ using a path in B(Γ′ ),
we can ensure that g = 1. By Lemma 2.23 below, for any isomorphism G → G′ there is at
most one f : T → T ′ which is G-equivariant. It follows that Φ̃ = δΦ,  ˜ so δΦ still satisfies the
Lemma.

Lemma 2.23. Let T (resp. T ′ ) be a minimal, irreducible G-tree (resp. G′ -tree). Let ϕ : G →
G′ be an isomorphism. Then, there is at most one ϕ-equivariant isomorphism f : T → T ′ .

Proof. For each hyperbolic element g ∈ G, any such f maps the axis of g to the axis of ϕ(g).
In particular, if the axes of g, h are disjoint, f maps the bridge between them to the bridge
between the axes of ϕ(g), ϕ(h). Since T is irreducible, every segment of T is contained in the
bridge between two hyperbolic elements [Pau89]. The lemma follows.

    Two graph of groups automorphisms can be composed [Bas93, 2.11] by

(F ′ , (ϕ′e′ ), (ϕ′v′ ), (γe′ ′ ))◦(F, (ϕe ), (ϕv ), (γe )) = (F ′ ◦F, (ϕ′F (e) ◦ϕe ), (ϕ′F (v) ◦ϕv ), ϕ′F (t(e)) (γe )γF′ (e) )).

By [Bas93, §2.12] this composition law makes the set of of graph of groups automorphisms of
Γ a group. Following [Bas93], we denote this group by δAut(Γ).
   Recall that Out(G) acts on the set of G-trees up to equivariant isomorphism, by precom-
position of the action. We denote by OutT (G) < Out(G) the stabiliser of T for this action.


                                                               22
Lemmas 2.20 and 2.22 say that if G y T is dual to Γ under some marking, then one has a
natural epimorphism δAut(Γ) ։ OutT (G).
    Let Homeo(Γ) be the group of graph automorphisms of the graph underlying Γ. By
definition of δAut(Γ), one has natural morphisms:

   • qΓ : δAut(Γ) → Homeo(Γ), defined by Φ = (F, (ϕe ), (ϕv ), (γe )) 7→ F
                    Q
   • qE : ker(qΓ ) → e∈E(Γ) Aut(Γe ) defined by Φ = (idΓ , (ϕe ), (ϕv ), (γe )) 7→ (ϕe )
                    Q
   • qV : ker(qE ) → v∈V (Γ) Aut(Γv ), defined by Φ = (idΓ , (idΓe ), (ϕv ), (γe )) 7→ (ϕv )
                    Q
   • qD : ker(qV ) → e∈E(Γ) Γt(e) defined by Φ = (idΓ , (idΓe ), (idΓv ), (γe )) 7→ (γe ).

Note that these morphisms need not be surjective.
                                                                    Q
Lemma 2.24. The morphismQ       q D is injective,  and its image is   e ZΓt(e) (Γe ).
   The image of qV is v Autm (Γv ; Pv ), where Pv is a marked peripheral structure induced
by Γ on Γv ; in other words, Autm (Γv ; Pv ) is the group of automorphisms of Γv which coincide
with an inner automorphism of Γv in restriction to each neighbouring edge group.

Proof. Injectivity of qD is clear, and the image is easily obtained by the commutation of the
diagram of Definition 2.19. Q
    The fact that Im qV ⊂ v Autm (Γv ; Pv ) follows from the commutation of this diagram
with ϕe = id. Conversely, consider (ϕv ) is a collection of automorphisms in Autm (Γv ; Pv ),
for all edge e there exists γe ∈ Gt(e) such that ϕv ◦ ie = adγe ◦ ie . Then the automorphism
Φ ∈ δAut(Γ) defined by F = id, ϕe = id, ϕv and γe shows that (ϕv ) ∈ Im qV . Φ is called an
extension of (ϕv )v∈V to Γ.

   The following lemma is routine, given the chain of quotients above.

Lemma 2.25. δAut(Γ) is generated by:

   • elements
            Q of the form Φ = (Id, idΓe , idΓv , (γe )) where (γe )e∈E(Γ) ranges over a generating
     set of e ZΓt(e) (Γe )
                                                      Q
   • for each element (ϕv ) of a generating set of v Autm (Γv ; Pv ) = Im qV , an extension of
     (ϕv ) to Γ (as in the proof of Lemma 2.24)

   • for every element in the image of qE , a preimage by qE

   • for every element in the image of qΓ , a preimage by qΓ .

   If one has a marking of Γ by G, the image of this generating set under the epimorphism
δAut(Γ) ։ OutT (G) gives a generating set for OutT (G).

2.7.4   Isomorphism problem for graph of groups
The isomorphism problem for graph of groups asks for an algorithm that, given two finite
graphs of groups Γ1 , Γ2 , decides whether there exists an isomorphism of graph of groups Φ
between Γ1 and Γ2 . If π1 (Γi ) is induced with a marked peripheral structure Qi , we want
additionally that the induced map Φ∗ : π1 (Γ1 ) → π1 (Γ2 ) sends Q1 to Q2 . The goal of this
section is to obtain a solution to the isomorphism problem for certain graph of groups.

                                                23
                                                                          (i)        (i)
Lemma 2.26. Let Γ1 , Γ2 be two graphs of groups, and Qi = (S1 , . . . , Sp ) be a marked
                                         (i)
peripheral structure of π1 (Γi ) where hSj i is contained in a vertex group Γv(i) of Γi , and not
                                                                                     j
conjugate into any incident edge group. For each vertex v ∈ Γi , the sub-tuple of Qi consisting
      (i)       (i)
of Sj ’s with vj = v defines a marked peripheral structure Qv of Γv .
     Let Φ = (F, (ϕe ), (ϕv ), (γe )) be an isomorphism of graphs of groups.
     Then Φ∗ : π1 (Γ1 ) → π1 (Γ2 ) is compatible with the peripheral structures Q1 , Q2 if and only
if for each v ∈ V (Γ1 ), ϕv : Γv → ΓF (v) is compatible with the peripheral structures Qv , QF (v) ,
                                                                                   (1)      (2)
and F is compatible with the peripheral structure in the sense that F (vj ) = vj                  for all
j ∈ {1, . . . , p}.

Remark 2.27. A priori, the π1 (Γi )-conjugacy class of a subgroup hSi may intersect Γv in
several Γv -conjugacy classes. The hypothesis that hSi is not conjugate into an incident edge
group actually prevents this.
                                                                  (1)     (2)
Proof. Assume ϕv maps Qv to QF (v) for all v, and that F (vj ) = vj             for all j. Consider the
          (1)                                                                                        (2)
image of Sj ⊂ Γv(1) by Φ∗ .        It is in ΓF (v(1) ) = Γv(2) , and conjugated in this group to Sj .
                    j                          j         j
                        (1)                              (2)
Therefore, Φ∗ maps Sj         to a π1 (Γ2 )-conjugate of Sj , so Φ∗ maps Q1 to Q2 .
                                   (1)                          (2)
      Conversely, consider S = Sj ⊂ Γv of Q1 , and S ′ = Sj ⊂ Γv′ the corresponding one in
Q2 . Assuming that Φ∗ (S) = S ′g for some g ∈ π1 (Γ2 , F (v)), we need to prove that v ′ = F (v)
and that ϕv (S) is conjugate to S ′ in Γv′ .
      We take v (resp. F (v)) as a base point for Γ1 (resp. Γ2 ). This may change Φ∗ by an
inner automorphism, but does not affect the result. Since Φ∗ (hSi) and hS ′ i are conjugate and
fix a unique vertex in the Bass-Serre tree Γ̃2 , these vertices have to be in the same orbit so
F (v) = v ′ .
      Then Φ∗ (S) = ϕv (S) ⊂ Γv′ ⊂ π1 (Γ2 , v ′ ). By assumption, there exists g ∈ π1 (Γ2 , v2 ) such
that ϕv (S) = S ′g . We claim that g ∈ Γv′ , which concludes the proof. Indeed, ϕv (S) and S ′
both fix the the base point of Γ̃2 , and no other point. It follows that g fixes the base point of
Γ̃2 , i. e. g ∈ Γv′ .

    In what follows, V is a class of groups (G, Pu ) with unmarked peripheral structures. By
abuse of notation, we also say that a group with marked peripheral structure (G, Pm ) lies
in V if the induced unmarked peripheral structure does. We assume that one can solve the
marked isomorphism problem in V, i. e. that one can decide whether two groups with marked
peripheral structures (G; Pm ), (G′ ; Pm
                                       ′ ) in V are isomorphic.


Proposition 2.28. Assume that V is a class of finitely presented groups with unmarked
peripheral structures for which the marked isomorphism problem is solvable.
    Then, given an input consisting of

   • Γ1 , Γ2 two finite graphs of groups, with marked peripheral structures Q1 , Q2 for π1 (Γ1 )
     and π1 (Γ2 ) such that
         – peripheral subgroups are conjugate in a vertex group but not in an edge group,
         – for each vertex v ∈ V (Γi ), Γv endowed with its unmarked peripheral structure
           induced by Γi and by Qi (as in Lemma 2.26), lies in V.
   • a graph isomorphism F : Γ1 → Γ2 ,
   • a collection of isomorphisms ϕe : Γe → ΓF (e) for e ∈ E(Γ1 ),

                                                   24
one can decide whether there exists an isomorphism of graph of groups Φ of the form Φ =
(F, (ϕe ), (ϕv ), (γe )) (where F and (ϕe )e∈E(Γ1 ) are the ones given as input), and such that Φ∗
maps Q1 to Q2 , and produces one if it exists.

Proof. Assume first that Γi have no peripheral structure. Choose an ordering of the oriented
edges of Γ1 , and for each edge e ∈ E(Γ1 ), let Se be a tuple generating the group Ge . Transport
this ordering and these markings to Γ2 using F and ϕe . This way, each vertex group of Γ1 and
Γ2 inherits an induced marked peripheral structure. The existence of Φ is equivalent to the
existence of isomorphisms ϕv : Γv → ΓF (v) and elements γe making the diagram of Definition
2.19 commute. This is equivalent to the fact that ϕv preserves the induced marked peripheral
structures of the vertex groups. The proposition follows.
    In presence of peripheral structures Qi , the same argument applies thanks to Lemma
2.26.

   We can now state a solution to the isomorphism problem for certain graphs of groups.

Corollary 2.29. Assume that E is either the class of finite groups, or of Z-groups, and that
V is a class of finitely presented groups with unmarked peripheral structures whose peripheral
subgroups are in E, for which the marked isomorphism problem is decidable.
    Consider C the following class of graphs of groups Γ, maybe together with a marked pe-
ripheral structure Q of π1 (Γ):

   • edge groups of Γ are in E
   • each peripheral subgroup of Q lies in E, is conjugate into a vertex group, but not into
     an edge group
   • each vertex group Γv of Γ, endowed with the unmarked peripheral structure induced by
     Γ and by Q, lies in V.

    Then the isomorphism problem for graph of groups in C (with peripheral structure) is
effectively solvable.

Proof. If two groups in E are isomorphic, we can, with our assumption, list the whole set of
isomorphisms between them. In particular, one can list all graph isomorphisms F : Γ1 → Γ2
such that Γe ≃ ΓF (e) , and list all possible isomorphisms ϕe : Γe → ΓF (e) . For any such choice,
we apply Proposition 2.28, which allows us to decide the existence of a graph of groups
isomorphism Φ between Γ1 and Γ2 preserving the peripheral structures.

Corollary 2.30. Consider E and V, and C classes of graph of groups Γ (maybe with a marked
peripheral structure Q) defined in Corollary 2.29.
    Assume moreover that there is an effective algorithm that computes a generating set of
Autm (H; Pm ) for all group with marked peripheral structure (H; Pm ) ∈ V, and an algorithm
computing a generating set of the centraliser ZH (P ) of a peripheral subgroup P of (H; P) ∈ V.
    Then given Γ (maybe with a marked peripheral structure Q) in C, one can compute a
system of generators for OutΓ̃ (π1 (Γ)) (or of Outm,Γ̃ (π1 (Γ), Q) of outer automorphisms of
π1 (Γ) preserving both Γ̃ and Q).

Proof. We first treat the absolute case (where no Q is given). We will compute the four sets
mentioned in Lemma 2.25.



                                               25
                                         Q
     Let qV : ker(qE ) ⊂ δAut(Γ) → v∈V (Γ) Aut(Γv ), be the map defined before Lemma 2.24.
Denote by Pv a marking of the peripheral structure of a vertex       Q group Γv defined by incident
edge groups. By Lemma 2.24, the       Q  image  of  q V is precisely  v Autm (Γv ; Pv ).
     First, a generating set for e ZΓt(e) (Γe ) is computable      Q by assumption. Second, by as-
sumption, we can compute a generating set for Im qV = v Autm (Γv ; Pv ). We can compute
a preimage under qV of each element in this generating set by finding correct values for γe for
every oriented edge so that the diagram of Definition 2.19 commutes. This can be done by
enumeration.
         Q       Third, one can list all maps F ∈ Homeo(Γ), and all families of isomorphisms
(ϕe ) ∈ e Isom(Γe , ΓF (e) ). For every such F and (ϕe ), we need to check whether it induces
an automorphism of Γ. This is exactly done by Proposition 2.28.
     According to Lemma 2.25, we have computed a set of generators for δAut(Γ), and hence
of OutΓ̃ (π1 (Γ)).
     Assume now that we are given a peripheral structure Q. Instead of ∂Aut(Γ), we have to
work with the subgroup ∂Aut(Γ, Q) consisting of automorphisms Φ = (F, (ϕe ), (ϕv ), (γe )) such
that Φ∗ : π1 (Γ) → π1 (Γ) preserve Q. Denote by Qv the marked peripheral structure induced
by Q on Γv (as in Lemma 2.26). By Lemma 2.26, Φ∗ is compatible with Q if and only if F fixes
all vertices containing a peripheral subgroup in Q, and each ϕv is compatible with Qv . The
first step is the same Q since ker qV automatically preserves Q, so the image of qD restricted to
∂Aut(Γ,
Q         Q)  is still  e ZΓt(e) (Γe ). For step 2, Lemma 2.26 says that qV (ker qE ∩ ∂Aut(Γ, Q)) =
   v Autm (Γv ; Pv ∪ Qv ), and we can compute a generating set by hypothesis. Finally, one can
list all maps
         Q      F ∈ Homeo(Γ) fixing vertices involved in Q, and all families of isomorphisms
(ϕe ) ∈ e Isom(Γe , ΓF (e) ). Proposition 2.28 allows us to check whether such F and (ϕe ),
extend to an automorphism of Γ preserving Q. This concludes the proof.

2.8   Deformation spaces of trees
Given two G-trees T1 , T2 we say that T1 dominates T2 if there is an equivariant (but otherwise
arbitrary) map T1 → T2 . Equivalently, T1 dominates T2 if every vertex stabiliser of T1 is
elliptic in T2 . We say that two G-trees T1 , T2 are in the same deformation space if they
dominate each other, or equivalently, if they have the same elliptic subgroups. This is clearly
an equivalence relation. The group of outer automorphisms Out(G) acts on the set of G-trees
by precomposition (recall that we identify equivariantly isomorphic G-trees). This induces
an action on each invariant deformation space (see [GL07] for more details).
     One says that a G-tree T is reduced if no orbit of edges of T can be collapsed so that T
and the collapsed tree lie in the same deformation space. Equivalently, T is reduced if for all
oriented edge e of the graph of groups T /G such that the edge morphism ie is onto, e is a
loop (i. e. o(e) = t(e)).
     In all G-trees we will consider, G will be hyperbolic, and edge stabilisers will be finite or
virtually cyclic. In particular, no edge stabiliser is properly contained in a conjugate of itself.
It follows that all deformation spaces D that we will consider are non-ascending, a technical
condition asking that no graph of groups of a tree in D has an edge e with both endpoints at
v, and such that ie (Ge ) = Gv and ie (Ge ) Gv [GL07, Prop. 7.1].

The Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space. The Stallings-Dunwoody deformation
space of a group G is the set of G-trees with finite edge stabilisers and finite or one-ended
vertex groups. The fact that this is indeed a deformation space follows from the fact that



                                                26
vertex groups of such a G-tree do not split over finite groups by Stallings theorem. Existence
of such G-trees, for a finitely presented group G, is Dunwoody’s original accessibility.
    A relative version also exists for (G, P) a group with peripheral structure, where we
consider only G-trees in which peripheral subgroups are elliptic.

Slide moves. Consider a G-tree T , and a pair of adjacent edges e1 = [a, b], e2 = [b, c] not
in the same orbit, such that Ge1 ⊂ Ge2 . Let T ′ be the G-tree having the same vertex set as
T , and whose edges are obtained from the edges of T by replacing each edge g.e1 = [g.a, g.b]
by an edge joining g.a to g.c. This definition does not depend on the choice of g because
Ge1 ⊂ Ge2 . We say that T ′ is obtained by sliding e1 across e2 .
     By [GL07, Th. 7.2], in a non-ascending deformation space, performing a slide move on
a reduced G-tree yields a reduced G-tree, and all reduced trees of D are connected by slide
moves.
     Let us describe a slide move at the level of the graph of groups. To avoid confusion, edges
in graphs of groups are written between brackets. At the level of the graph of groups T /Γ,
a slide move is determined by two different oriented edges [e1 ] 6= [e2 ] with same final vertex
v, and an element g ∈ Gv such that i[e1 ] (G[e1 ] ) ⊂ i[e2 ] (G[e2 ] )g . After the slide, the endpoint of
[e1 ] is attached to the origin of [e2 ], and the new monomorphism is i[e′1 ] = i[e2 ] ◦ i−1[e2 ] ◦ adg ◦ i[e1 ] .

Lemma 2.31. Let T be a G-tree, and consider a pair of adjacent edges e1 = [a, b], e2 = [b, c]
not in the same orbit (as non-oriented edges), such that Ge1 ⊂ Ge2 . Let e3 = ge2 for some
element g in the centraliser of Ge2 in Gv . Let T ′ (resp. T ′′ ) be the G-tree obtained by sliding
e1 across e2 (resp. across e3 ). Then, T ′ and T ′′ are in the same orbit under Out(G).

Proof. This is best seen at the level of graph of groups. Let [e′1 ] and [e′′1 ] be the slid edge
obtained from [e1 ] in the graphs of groups T ′ /G and T ′′ /G. These graphs of groups differ only
in that the morphism i[e′1 ] is, in general, not equal to i[e′′1 ] . Indeed, i[e′1 ] = i[e2 ] ◦ i−1
                                                                                                 [e2 ] ◦ adg1 ◦ i[e1 ]
for some g1 , and i[e′′1 ] = i[e2 ] ◦ i−1
                                       [e2 ] ◦ adgg1 ◦ i[e1 ] . This means that i[e1 ] = adi[e2 ] (g) ◦ i[e1 ] , and
                                                                                   ′′                      ′

there is an isomorphism Φ between the graph of groups (Definition 2.19). By [Bas93, §2.3]
(recalled in Lemma 2.20 above), there is a Φ∗ -equivariant isomorphism Φ̃ between T ′ and
T ′′ .

2.9     Tree of cylinders
Consider G a hyperbolic group and recall that a Z-tree is a G-tree whose edge stabilisers are in
the class Z of virtually cyclic subgroups with infinite centre. Let ∼ be the commensurability
relation on Z: given A, B ∈ Z, A ∼ B if A ∩ B has finite index in A and B.
    Given T a Z-tree, ∼ induces an equivalence relation on edges of T defined by e ∼ e′ if
Ge ∼ Ge′ . A cylinder Y ⊂ T is the union of the edges in an equivalence class. Each cylinder
is a subtree of T [GL08]. The tree of cylinders Tc of T is the tree dual to the covering of T by
its cylinders in the following sense. Let V1 (Tc ) be the set of cylinders of T , and V0 (Tc ) be the
set of vertices v ∈ T which lie in at least 2 cylinders. The tree Tc is the bipartite G-tree whose
vertex set is V (Tc ) = V0 (Tc ) ⊔ V1 (Tc ), and where x ∈ V0 (Tc ) and Y ∈ V1 (Tc ) are connected by
an edge (x, Y ) if and only if x ∈ Y (see [GL08] for details).
    The stabiliser GY of a cylinder Y is the commensurator of some edge group Ge ∈ Z.
Since G is hyperbolic, GY = V C(Ge ) is the maximal virtually cyclic group containing Ge
(GY might have finite centre). Also note for future use that since Ge has finite index in GY ,


                                                         27
GY is elliptic in T . The stabiliser of an edge (x, Y ) of Tc is virtually cyclic: it is infinite by
[GL08, Rem 4.4], and virtually cyclic because contained in GY . Because edge stabilisers of
Tc may fail to be in Z (they may have finite centre), one defines collapsed tree of cylinders
Tc∗ obtained from Tc by collapsing all edges whose stabiliser are not in Z.

Lemma 2.32. Let G be hyperbolic, and T be a Z-tree.
   Then T , Tc and Tc∗ lie in the same deformation space. Every edge stabiliser of Tc and Tc∗
contains an edge stabiliser of T with finite index. If edge stabilisers of T are Zmax , the so are
edge stabilisers of Tc∗ .

Proof. The fact that T dominates Tc which dominates Tc∗ is clear and general. We saw that
the stabiliser GY of each cylinder is elliptic in T . Thus, every vertex stabiliser of Tc is elliptic
in T , so T and Tc lie in the same deformation space [GL08, Prop. 5.2]. By [GL08, Cor. 5.10],
Tc∗ lies in the same deformation space as T .
    By [GL08, Rem 4.4], the stabiliser of any edge ε = (x, Y ) of Tc contains an edge stabiliser
Ge of T . Since GY is virtually cyclic, Ge ⊂ Gε ⊂ GY are commensurable to each other. The
last two assertion follow.

   Recall that we identify two G-trees when there is a G-equivariant isomorphism between
them, which defines equality in the following statement:

Proposition 2.33 ([GL08, Cor. 4.10]). Let T, T ′ be two Z-trees in the same deformation
space.
   Then Tc = Tc′ and Tc∗ = Tc′∗ .

   On the algorithmic side, we have:

Lemma 2.34. Let G be a hyperbolic group. Given a Z-tree T (represented by a graph of
groups decomposition of G), one can compute the graph of group decompositions corresponding
to Tc and Tc∗ .

Proof. Since it is possible to decide whether a given subgroup of G is in Z, it is enough to
compute effectively a graph of group decompositions corresponding to Tc .
    With the notations above, the set of vertices of Tc /G consists of two subsets: V0 (Tc )/G,
which is the set of vertices of T /G with non-elementary vertex groups, and V1 (Tc )/G, which
is the set of orbits of cylinders in T . Note that this set of orbits is in natural correspondence
with the equivalence classes of edge groups of the graph of groups T /G, under the relation
(Ge ∼G Ge′ if ∃g ∈ G, Ge ∼ Gge′ ) where ∼ is the commensurability relation as above.
Since G is hyperbolic, Ge ∼ Gge′ if and only if Zmax (Ge ) (the maximal Z-group containing
Ge ) is conjugate to Zmax (Ge′ ). One can list all automorphisms Zmax (Ge ) → Zmax (Ge′ ) by
Lemma 2.9, and use the simultaneous conjugacy problem to decide whether these groups are
conjugate. The stabiliser of the V1 vertex corresponding to Ge is GY = V C(Ge ). Therefore,
we can compute the set of vertices of Tc /G, and their vertex groups.
    Let us compute the set of edges incident to a certain vertex v0 whose group is non-
elementary. Fix some representative ṽ0 ∈ T . Edges of Tc incident on ṽ0 correspond to
cylinders containing ṽ0 so edges of Tc /G incident to v0 are in correspondence with equivalence
classes of the edges of T incident to ṽ0 for the relation (Ge ∼Gṽ0 Ge′ if ∃g ∈ Gṽ0 , Ge ∼ Gge′ )
where ∼ is the commensurability relation. As above, knowing conjugacy classes of groups of
edges incident to ṽ0 , we can compute these equivalence classes (here, we are using the fact


                                                 28
that Gv0 is itself a hyperbolic group, see for instance [Bow98]). The edge groups are the
commensurators in Gv0 , and the edge monomorphism is given by inclusion. The vertex in
V1 (Tc ) of Tc /G on which the edge is attached (recall that Tc /G is bipartite), is the conjugacy
class of its commensurator in G, and the edge monomorphism is inclusion, followed by some
conjugation to arrive in the right conjugate. This allows us to compute the graph of groups
Tc /G.


3      Isomorphism problem for rigid hyperbolic groups
In this section we will formulate and prove a rigidity criterion extending the one that was
mentioned the introduction (Proposition 6). We will also give an algorithm that determines
whether a given hyperbolic group (with marked peripheral structure) satisfies or not the
criterion, and we will give a solution of the isomorphism problem for groups satisfying the
rigidity criterion.

3.1     A rigidity criterion
Recall that a homomorphism f : (G, P) → (H, Q) where P = (S1 , . . . , Sn ) and Q =
(S1′ , . . . , Sn′ ) is a homomorphism f : G → H sending each peripheral tuple Si to a conju-
gate of Si′ . We say that two such homomorphisms f, g are post-conjugate if there exists h ∈ H
such that g = adh ◦ f . We say that G is one-ended relative to P (or that (G, P) is one-ended)
if G has no non-trivial splitting over a finite group relative to P (i. e. in which peripheral
subgroups are elliptic).

Proposition 3.1. Let (G; P) be a hyperbolic group with a marked peripheral structure. As-
sume that G is one-ended relative to P. Then the following are equivalent:

    (i) (G; P) splits non-trivially over a maximal Z-subgroup (relative to P)

 (ii) Outm (G; P) is infinite

(iii) for all R > 0, there are infinitely many post-conjugacy classes of endomorphisms of
      (G; P) injective on a ball of radius R

 (iv) there is (H, Q) a one-ended hyperbolic group with a marked peripheral structure, such
      that for all R > 0, there are infinitely many post-conjugacy classes of morphisms
      (G; P) → (H; Q) (respecting the marked peripheral structures) that are injective on
      the ball of radius R of G

 (v) G admits a non-trivial action on an R-tree T , with finite or Zmax (pointwise) arc sta-
     bilisers, with finite tripod stabilisers, and such that every peripheral subgroup of P fixes
     a point in T .

   We see this result as providing an alternative: either (G, P) is rigid (in the sense of the
negation of (ii) or better, but more technical, of the negation of (iv)), or it admits a splitting
over a Zmax -subgroup. The fifth point of the equivalence will be auxiliary. Let us remark
that the peripheral subgroups in the statement can be arbitrary finitely generated subgroups.




                                               29
Proof. Clearly, (ii) =⇒ (iii) =⇒ (iv). Let us prove that (i) =⇒ (ii).
    Assume that we have a non-trivial decomposition of G as an amalgam G = A ∗C B or an
HNN extension G = A∗C over a Zmax -subgroup C. The splitting being non-trivial, in the
case of an amalgamation, A and B strictly contain C, hence have finite centre. In the case
of an HNN extension, C is a proper subgroup of A (under both embeddings actually) since
G is hyperbolic, so A has finite centre. It follows from [Lev05a, Prop. 3.1] that the group of
Dehn twists on the edge of the splitting is infinite. This proves (ii).
    It remains to prove the most important part, namely (iv) =⇒ (v) =⇒ (i). We begin
by the first implication, a careful adaptation of Bestvina and Paulin’s argument.
    Fix generating sets S, S ′ of G and H respectively, and consider the corresponding Cayley
graphs Cay G, Cay H. We measure lengths in G and H with respect to the word metrics.
Consider a sequence of morphisms ϕn : (G; P) → (H; Q), in distinct post-conjugacy classes,
such that ϕn is injective on the n-ball of G. Let us choose them in minimal position for a given
set of generators S of G: each of them realises the minimum of mn = max{d(1, ϕn (s)), s ∈ S}
over their post-conjugacy class. Since the morphisms are not post-conjugate to each other,
mn goes to infinity. We can apply Bestvina-Paulin’s argument.
    Let us consider the renormalised space (Cay H, dn ) where dn is the word metric divided
by mn . It is endowed with an action of G induced by ϕn . This sequence of actions converges
to an isometric action of G on R-tree T in the equivariant Gromov-Hausdorff topology. Up to
replacing T by a subtree, we can assume that the action of G is minimal. This action satisfies
the following properties:

   1. G has no global fixed point, and every peripheral subgroup in P fixes a point in T

   2. tripod stabilisers are finite

   3. stabilisers of non-degenerate segments of T are finite or virtually cyclic

    These properties are rather classical, and we refer the reader to standard adaptations of
arguments of Bestvina and Paulin, [Bes88, Pau88]. The fact that each peripheral subgroup P
of P is elliptic in T follows from the fact that the translation length in Cay H of any element
of P for the action given by ϕn is independent of n, and therefore tends to zero in the rescaled
metric. There remains to prove that arc stabilisers are finite or Zmax .
    Let C be the stabiliser of some arc [x, y] ⊂ T . Assuming C is infinite, we already know
that C is virtually cyclic, and let’s prove that its centre is infinite. Using the classification of
virtually cyclic groups, C is either cyclic-by-finite, or dihedral-by-finite.
    We proceed by contradiction, and we assume that it is an extension 1 → F → C →
D∞ → 1. We claim that there exists σ, τ ∈ C with τ of infinite order such that (τ )σ = τ −1 .
There are such elements in D∞ , so consider σ, τ ∈ C such that (τ )σ = τ −1 f for some f ∈ F .
Replacing τ by a power, we can assume that τ centralises F . For each k, write (τ k )σ = τ −k fk
with fk ∈ F . Since F is finite, there is k 6= j with fk = fj , which implies (τ k−j )σ = τ j−k .
    Let us also consider γ = τ k , where k is greater than 10δ/t0 , and t0 > 0 is the smallest
stable translation length of all hyperbolic elements of H (which is positive, see [Del96, Prop.
3.1(iii)]).
    Consider D = d(x, y), and ǫ < D/200. Let us then choose N a sufficiently large integer
such that in (Cay H, dN ), x and y are approximated by two points x′ , y ′ (with dN (x′ , y ′ ) ≥
D − ε), such that, for all α ∈ {ϕN (γ), ϕN (σ)}, dN (αx′ , x′ ) < ǫ and dN (αy ′ , y ′ ) < ǫ. Moreover
one can choose N such that the hyperbolicity constant δN = δ/mN of (Cay H, dN ) is at most


                                                 30
ǫ, and also such that ϕN is injective enough so that ϕN (τ ) has not finite order (recall that
there is an explicit bound on the order of torsion elements in H). Note that N is now fixed,
so ϕN is a fixed morphism, and dN a fixed metric. We use the notations σ ′ = ϕN (σ) and
γ ′ = ϕN (γ).
     By definition of γ, γ ′ has stable translation length at least 1000δN (we measure all lengths
in the metric dN ). Since γ ′ does not move x′ and y ′ by more than ǫ, its stable norm is at
most ε and its translation axis must pass within ǫ from both x′ and y ′ . It follows that there
exists an integer n such that dN (γ ′n x′ , y ′ ) ≤ 3ǫ.
     We claim that γ ′n almost sends y ′ to x′ . Indeed,

                               dN (γ ′n y ′ , x′ ) =     dN (y ′ , γ ′−n x′ )
                                                   =  dN (y ′ , σ ′ γ ′n σ ′−1 x′ )
                                                   = dN (σ ′−1 y ′ , γ ′n σ ′−1 x′ ).

Since σ ′−1 moves x′ and y ′ by at most ε, we get the claim, namely:

                               dN (γ ′n y ′ , x′ ) ≤ dN (y ′ , γ ′n x′ ) + 2ε ≤ 5ε.

It follows that d(x′ , γ ′2n x′ ) ≤ 8ε.
    Now consider x′′ a point such that d(x′ , x′′ ) ≤ ε, and d(x′′ , γ ′ x′′ ) = minz∈H d(z, γ ′ z)
(existnece is guaranteed by the fact that x′ is at distance at most ǫ from the axis of γ ′ ). By
[Del96, Prop. 3.1(ii)],

                          n||γ ′ || ≥ d(x′′ , γ ′n x′′ ) − 120δN ≥ D − 3ε − 120ε.

It follows that
                                 d(x′ , γ ′2n x′ ) ≥ 2n||γ ′ || ≥ 2(D − 123ε)
which is greater than 8ǫ, a contradiction. This proves that C has infinite centre.
      Let’s prove that if the stabiliser C of an arc [x, y] is infinite, then it is a Zmax -subgroup.
Let Ĉ ⊃ C be the Zmax -subgroup of G containing C. We argue by contradiction, and we can
assume for instance that that for some σ ∈ Ĉ, x 6= σx. Since T has finite tripod stabilisers
and C ∩ C σ is infinite, the convex hull I of [x, y] ∪ [σx, σy] contains no tripod. Since σ is
elliptic in T , it fixes a point z ∈ I. Changing C to the pointwise stabiliser of I (a finite index
subgroup), we can assume that C fixes [x, z], and σ ∈ Ĉ fixes z but not x.
      Consider an element γ of infinite order in the centre of Ĉ. Up to changing γ by a power,
we can assume that γ ∈ C, and that ϕN (γ) has stable norm at least 1000δN as before. Since
γ ∈ C, it fixes x, z. Define D2 = d(x, σx), and ε < D2 /100.
      We take N large enough so that in (Cay H, dN ), x and z are approximated by two points
x′ , z ′ (with dN (x′ , z ′ ) ≥ d(x, z)−ε), such that, ϕN (γ) has infinite order, ϕN (γ) moves x′ and z ′
by at most ε (for the metric dN ), ϕN (σ) moves z ′ by at most ε, and dN (ϕN (σ)x′ , x′ ) ≥ D2 − ε.
We fix such an N , and we define γ ′ = ϕN (γ), σ ′ = ϕN (σ) as above. As before, the axis of
γ ′ passes close to x′ and z ′ , and there exists n such that dN (γ ′n z ′ , x′ ) < 3ε. Then, since σ
commutes with γ.

                   dN (σ ′ x′ , x′ ) ≤ dN (σ ′ γ ′n z ′ , x′ ) + 3ε = dN (γ ′n σ ′ z ′ , x′ ) + 3ε.

Since σ ′ almost fixes z ′ , we get

                                dN (σ ′ x′ , x′ ) ≤ dN (γ ′n z ′ , x′ ) + 4ε ≤ 7ε.

                                                         31
This contradicts dN (σ ′ x′ , x′ ) ≥ D2 − ε. Thus C is a Zmax -subgroup.
    This shows (iv) =⇒ (v). It remains to show that (v) =⇒ (i).
    We apply a result of Rips Theory obtained by the second author (Main Theorem of
[Gui08]). Recall that an arc I is unstable if some subarc J ⊂ I has strictly larger stabiliser
than I. Since arc stabilisers of T are either finite or Zmax , unstable arc stabilisers are finite.
Recall that a graph of action on R-trees is an R-tree obtained by gluing equivariantly a family
Yv of R-trees (called vertex trees) along points. The combinatorics of the gluing is given by a
simplicial tree S endowed with an action of G: to each vertex v ∈ S corresponds an R-tree Yv
endowed with an action of Gv , and to each edge e = [u, v] of S corresponds a pair of points
in Yu , Yv to be glued together. By [Gui08, Theorem 5.1], either G splits over a finite group
relative to P, or T has a decomposition into a graph of actions where each vertex action is
either
   • simplicial: Yv is a simplicial tree;
   • of Seifert type: Gv y Yv has finite kernel Nv , Gv /Nv is the fundamental group of a
     conical 2-orbifold Σv with boundary, and π1 (Σv ) y Yv is dual to an arational measured
     foliation on this orbifold;

   • axial: Yv is a line, and Gv , its stabiliser, is finitely generated with dense orbits in Yv .
    The finiteness of the kernel of Seifert type vertex actions follows from the finiteness of
tripod stabilisers. If some Yv is a non-degenerate simplicial tree, then collapsing all the
vertex trees not in the orbit of Yv provides a simplicial tree T0 with an action of G. Since arc
stabilisers of T are finite or Zmax , this gives a splitting of G over a finite or a Zmax -subgroup.
There is no axial components since Gv would have some quotient isomorphic to a subgroup of
Isom(R) containing Z2 with finite or Zmax kernel. This is impossible since such a Gv would
not contain a free group, so would be virtually cyclic, and could not map onto such a group.
    Finally, assume that some Yv is of Seifert type, hence a hanging orbifold vertex of S.
Since Σv admits an arational measured foliation, it contains a two-sided simple closed curve,
not parallel to the boundary in Σv , and not bounding a Möbius strip or a disk with at most
one cone point. Then this curve defines a splitting of π1 (Σv ) over a group C ≃ Z which is
Zmax in π1 (Σv ). Let Ĉ ⊂ Gv be the preimage of C so that Gv splits over Ĉ. Refining S
using this splitting of Gv defines a splitting of G over Ĉ. Since Ĉ fixes no edge of S and is a
Zmax -subgroup of Gv , it is a Zmax -subgroup of G.


3.2   Satisfiability of the criterion, and isomorphism problem
In the rest of the section, our main goal is the following result, that allows us to decide
whether a given group satisfies the rigidity criterion, and to solve the isomorphism problem
for such groups.
Theorem 3.2. There exists an algorithm which takes as input two non-elementary hyperbolic
groups with marked peripheral structures (G; P), (H; Q), which always stops, and outputs
either
 (a) a non-trivial splitting of (G; P) over a finite or Zmax -subgroup,
 (b) or a finite list F of morphisms (G; P) → (H; Q), such that any monomorphism (G; P) →
     (H; Q) is post-conjugate to an element in F.

                                                32
Remark 3.3.    • The splittings and morphisms in the statement are compatible with the
    peripheral structure. There is no assumption on the peripheral subgroups defined by P
    and Q (they are not assumed to be elementary, or quasiconvex).

   • The assumption that the groups are not elementary is superfluous, as one could easily
     extend the algorithm in this case.
    Given (G; P) and (H; Q), there may exist both a splitting as in (a) and a finite list as
in (b). In this case, we cannot guess which output the algorithm will provide. However,
if (G; P) = (H; Q), and if (G; P) is one-ended, the equivalence (i) ⇔ (iii) in the rigidity
criterion 3.1 ensures that only one output is possible. Therefore, one can decide whether a
one-ended (G; P) satisfies the rigidity criterion by running the algorithm of Theorem 3.2 with
(H; Q) = (G; P): this occurs if and only if the output is a list of morphisms as in (b). If G is
virtually cyclic and one-ended relative to P, then some peripheral subgroup has finite index
in G so (G, P) always satisfies the rigidity criterion. One deduces immediately the following
corollary.

Corollary 3.4. Given a hyperbolic group with marked peripheral structure (G; P) that does
not split over a finite group relative to P, one can decide whether (G; P) satisfies the rigidity
criterion 3.1.

   One also deduces the following:

Corollary 3.5. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for one-ended rigid hyperbolic
groups with marked peripheral structure. More precisely:
    There is an algorithm which takes as input two hyperbolic groups with marked peripheral
structures (G; P) and (H; Q) which don’t split over a finite or a Zmax -subgroup (relative to
their peripheral structure), and which decides whether (G; P) is isomorphic to (H; Q) (re-
specting the peripheral structures), and computes the finite group Outm (G; P).

Proof of the corollary. One can decide whether G or H is virtually cyclic by Lemma 2.8. If
G or H is virtually cyclic, the corollary follows easily from Lemma 2.9.
    Otherwise, apply the algorithm of Theorem 3.2 to ((G; P), (H; Q)). Because (G; P) does
not split over finite or Zmax -subgroups, we get a list F of morphisms (G; P) → (H; Q) contain-
ing a post-conjugate of any monomorphism. Applying the same algorithm to ((H; Q), (G; P)),
we get a similar list F ′ of morphisms (H; Q) → (G; P). Since F and F ′ contain a representa-
tive of the post-conjugacy class of any monomorphism, (G; P) and (H; Q) are isomorphic if
and only if there exists ϕ ∈ F and ϕ′ ∈ F ′ such that ϕ◦ϕ′ and ϕ′ ◦ϕ are inner automorphisms.
This can be tested using the simultaneous conjugacy problem.
    In order to compute Outm (G; P), we apply the algorithm of Theorem 3.2 for (G; P), and
(H; Q) = (G; P). Since G does not split over a finite or Zmax -subgroup, we obtain a list of
morphisms F. As above, a morphism ϕ ∈ F is an automorphism if and only if there exists
ψ ∈ F such that ψ ◦ ϕ and ϕ ◦ ψ are inner automorphisms. We can thus sort out which
morphisms are automorphisms, and we can effectively check whether two of them are post-
conjugate, and therefore we find a section of Outm (G; P) in F ⊂ Autm (G; P). Using again
a solution to the simultaneous conjugacy problem in G, one can compute the multiplication
table of Outm (G; P) on these representatives.




                                               33
3.2.1   Short morphisms
We introduce the notion of short morphism, which provide good representatives of a post-
conjugacy class of morphism. We follow [DG08b].
    Let H be a hyperbolic group, and δ a hyperbolicity constant for a given set of generators.
Let us define for all h ∈ H, the set Lh ⊂ H of all elements g at distance at least 1000δ from
1, and such that some geodesic segment [1, g] passes at distance at most 20δ from both h and
gh.

Lemma 3.6. For all h, Lh ⊂ H is a quasi-isometrically embeddable rational subset (see
Definition 2.6).

Proof. Consider the ball of radius 20δ around h, and for each element x in it, the set of
geodesic words representing x. Let W (h) be this collection of words. This is finite and
computable. The language of all geodesics in H is a regular language, and Lh is the image
of the geodesics words that have a prefix in W (h) and a suffix in W (h−1 ). This subset of
geodesic words is clearly regular, and this makes Lh ⊂ H a quasi-isometrically embeddable
rational subset .

   Let G be a group and choose two elements a, b ∈ G.

Definition 3.7. Let us say that a morphism ϕ : G → H is long (for the given choice of a, b)
if there is h of length 200δ such that (at least) one of the three situations occurs:

   • ϕ(a) and ϕ(b) are in Lh , or

   • ϕ(b), ϕ(ab) and ϕ(a−1 b) are in Lh , or

   • ϕ(a), ϕ(ba) and ϕ(b−1 a) are in Lh .

   Let us say that a morphism ϕ : G → H is short if it is not long.

Proposition 3.8. In any post-conjugacy class of morphisms ϕ : G → H that sends a, b, ab±1
to infinite order elements generating a non-elementary subgroup of H, there is at least one,
and at most finitely many short morphisms.

    The proposition follows form Propositions 3.10, and 3.12 below. Our argument is essen-
tially extracted from [DG08b, Corollary 4.14 and 4.18].
    For g ∈ H, we denote by Z(g) its centraliser.

Lemma 3.9. (Compare with [DG08b, Lemma 4.13]) For all g ∈ H, there is a constant K(g)
such that if d(h−1 , Z(g)) ≥ K(g), and if h0 ∈ [1, h] is the point such that |h0 | = 200δ, then
hgh−1 is in Lh0 .

Proof. Note that d(h−1 , Z(g)) = d(1, hZ(g)). If hgh−1 = h′ gh′−1 then h′−1 h ∈ Z(g) and so
hZ(g) = h′ Z(g). Therefore there is K(g) such that if d(1, hZ(g)) ≥ K(g), then d(1, hgh−1 ) >
460δ + d(1, g). Consider h0 as defined by the lemma.
    We claim that if h0 is at distance at least 20δ from [1, hgh−1 ], then |hgh−1 | ≤ 450δ + |g|.
The Lemma will follow by applying the same argument to g−1 in place of g. We work in an
approximation tree T for the quadrilateral (1, h, hg, hgh−1 ), and we denote by x the point of
T , corresponding to some x in this quadrilateral. There are three combinatorial possibilities
for T as shown on Figure 1, and we denote by a, b, c, d, e the lengths as shown on Figure 1.

                                               34
 h                       hg        hgh−1                     hg           hg                    hgh−1
          b          c                     b             c                     b            c
               e                                    e                                   e
     h0
                                               h0                                  h0
          a          d                     a             d                     a            d
1                          hgh−1   1                          h       1                            h


                              Figure 1: Three cases in Lemma 3.9


Note that in all cases a ≤ d(1, h0 ) since otherwise, h0 ∈ [1, ghg −1 ] so d(h0 , [1, hgh−1 ] ≤ 10δ,
a contradiction. Thus, a ≤ |h0 | + 10δ = 210δ. In the first case, we have d(1, ghg−1 ) =
a + e + d ≤ a + e + |h| + 10δ ≤ a + e + a + b + 20δ = 2a + (e + b) + 20δ ≤ 420δ + |g| + 30δ,
so |ghg −1 | ≤ 460δ + |g|. In the two other cases, since d(1, h) = d(hg, hgh−1 ), we have
a + d = b + c up to an error of at most 10δ. Thus in case 2, d(1, hgh−1 ) = a + b ≤
a + (a + d − c) + 10δ ≤ 2a + d + 10δ ≤ 420δ + |g| + 20δ, and |hgh−1 | ≤ 450δ + |g|. Similarly, in
case 3, d(1, hgh−1 ) = a+e+c ≤ a+e+(a+b−d)+10δ ≤ 2a+(b+e)+10δ ≤ 420δ+|g|+20δ.

Proposition 3.10. (Compare with [DG08b, Corollary 4.14]) Consider a morphism ϕ : G →
H that sends a, b, ab±1 to torsion free elements generating a non-elementary subgroup of H.
Then only finitely many post-conjugates of ϕ are short.

Proof. Let K > max{K(a±1 ), K(b±1 ), K(a±1 b±1 ), K(b±1 a±1 )}. For all x ∈ G, write Nx =
{h ∈ H, d(h−1 , Z(ϕ(x))) ≤ K}. Since, by assumption, hϕ(a)i and hϕ(b)i are infinite cyclic
subgroups not in the same elementary subgroup of H, the K-neighbourhoods of their cen-
tralisers have finite intersection, therefore Na ∩Nb is finite. Similarly, Na ∩Nab and Na ∩Na−1 b
are finite.
    Assume that, for an infinite family of different elements hn , the morphism hn ϕ(·)h−1  n is
short. By the previous lemma, for all n, hn ∈ Na ∪ Nb (falsification of the first point of
the definition of long). Thus we can assume that for all n, hn ∈ (Na \ Nb ), or that for
all n, hn ∈ (Nb \ Na ). In the first case, ϕ(b±1 ) ∈ L(hn )0 (with notation as in the previous
lemma). By falsification of the second point of the definition of long (and the previous lemma),
hn ∈ Nab ∪ Na−1 b for all n. But both Na ∩ Nab and Na ∩ Na−1 b are finite (as we noted earlier).
This is a contradiction. The second case is proved similarly using the third point of the
definition of long.

      Define, for a morphism ϕ, the quantity Q(ϕ) = max{|ϕ(a)|, |ϕ(b)|}.

Lemma 3.11. (Compare with [DG08b, Lemma 4.17]) Let ϕ : G → H be a long morphism,
and let h be as in the definition of long. Then Q(h−1 ϕ(·)h) < Q(ϕ).

Proof. First, it is obvious that if g ∈ Lh , then |h−1 gh| < |g|. This already indicates that if ϕ
satisfies the first point of the definition of long, the statement is true.
    By symmetry of the argument, we can assume that the second point of the definition
holds, so ϕ(b), ϕ(ab) and ϕ(a−1 b) are in Lh . As we said, |h−1 ϕ(b)h| < |ϕ(b)|. We need to
show that |h−1 ϕ(a)h| < max(|ϕ(a)|, |ϕ(b)|). Recall that since ϕ(b) ∈ Lh , |ϕ(b)| ≥ 1000δ. In
particular, if |ϕ(a)| ≤ 470δ, then |h−1 ϕ(a)h| ≤ 2|h| + |ϕ(a)| ≤ 870δ < |ϕ(b)| and we are done.
    The discussion will now take place in the triangle (1, ϕ(a), ϕ(ab)). We work in an ap-
proximation triangle T , and we denote by x a point of T corresponding to a point x of this
triangle. Consider hb ∈ [1, ϕ(b)] (resp. hab ∈ [1, ϕ(ab)]) at distance at most 20δ from h, and


                                                    35
va = ϕ(a).hb ∈ [ϕ(a), ϕ(b)]. If the segments [1, hab ] and [ϕ(a), va ] have a common point in T ,
then |ϕ(a)| ≤ d(1, hab ) + d(ϕ(a), va ) + 10δ ≤ 2|h| + 70δ ≤ 470δ, a case already treated. If hab
and va both lie in [1, ϕ(a)], then |h−1 ϕ(a)h| < |ϕ(a)| and we are done.

                          ϕ(ab)                                                         ϕ(ab)
                   hab                                                      va
   1     ≃ |h|                                        1   ≃ |h|         τ
                                                                                                ϕ(b)
             τ                                                    hab         ≃ |h|
                              ≃ |h|
                    va

                                  ϕ(a)                                           ϕ(a)

                              Figure 2: Two cases in Lemma 3.11

    Let τ be the centre of T . There are two remaining cases: either hab ∈ [τ, ϕ(ab)] and
va ∈ [τ, ϕ(a)], or hab ∈ [1, τ ] and va ∈ [τ, ϕ(ab)] (see Figure 2). In the first case, we have
|hϕ(a)h−1 | = d(h, ϕ(a)h) ≤ 40δ + d(hab , va ) ≤ 50δ + d(hab , va ) ≤ 50δ + d(ϕ(a), ϕ(ab)) −
d(ϕ(a), va ) ≤ 70δ + |ϕ(b)| − d(ϕ(a), va ) ≤ 110δ + |ϕ(b)| − |h| = |ϕ(b)| − 90δ (recall that
|h| = 200δ) and we are done. In the second case, we consider an approximation tree of the
quadrilateral (1, ϕ(a), ϕ(ab), ϕ(b)). If d(va , τ ) ≤ 50δ, then |h−1 ϕ(a)h| < |ϕ(a)| and we are
done. Let τ ′ be the centre of (ϕ(a), ϕ(ab), ϕ(b)). Since ϕ(a−1 b) ∈ Lh , d(va , [ϕ(a), ϕ(b)]) ≤ 50δ.
In particular, either τ ′ ∈ [va , ϕ(ab)] (as on Figure 2), or d(τ ′ , va ) ≤ 50δ. In both cases,
d(hab , va ) ≤ d(hab , ϕ(b)) + 50δ = d(1, ϕ(b)) − d(1, hab ) + 50δ ≤ |ϕ(b)| − d(1, hab ) + 70δ ≤
|ϕ(b)| − 110δ. As above, this implies |h−1 ϕ(a)h| < |ϕ(b)|.


Proposition 3.12. Let ϕ : G → H be a morphism, then some post-conjugate of ϕ is short.

Proof. Choose a post-conjugate ϕ′ of ϕ with Q(ϕ′ ) minimal. By the previous lemma, ϕ′ is
short.

   Proposition 3.8 follows from Propositions 3.10 and 3.12.

3.2.2   Listing morphisms
Consider (G; P) and (H; Q) two groups with marked peripheral structure, a, b ∈ G generating
a free subgroup, and some radius R ≥ 0. We assume that we have a finite generating set for
G, so that we can talk of BG (R), its ball of radius R for the word metric.
     Say that a morphism ϕ : (G; P) → (H; Q) is almost injective with respect to a, b, R if
ϕ(a), ϕ(b), ϕ(ab±1 ) have infinite order and generate a non-elementary subgroup of H, and h
is injective in restriction to BG (R). Clearly, if a, b generate a non-abelian free subgroup of G,
then any monomorphism is almost injective with respect to a, b, R for any R ≥ 0.
     From [Del96] we know that there is a computable constant N such that, for any two
elements x, y of H, xN , and y N generate a free group (which may be trivial or cyclic).
Therefore, for a, b ∈ G and any morphism ϕ : G → H such that ϕ(a) and ϕ(b) have infinite
order, hϕ(a), ϕ(b)i is non-elementary if and only if [ϕ(a)N , ϕ(b)N ] 6= 1. Also note that there
exists a computable constant K such that x ∈ H has infinite order if and only if it has order
greater than K.



                                                 36
Proposition 3.13. There is an algorithm as follows. Its input is a finitely presented group
with a marked peripheral structure (G; P), a solution of the word problem in G, two elements
a, b ∈ G, and a hyperbolic group (H; Q), with a marked peripheral structure.
     This algorithm terminates if and only if there exists R0 > 0 such that there are only
finitely many post-conjugacy classes of morphisms (G; P) → (H; Q) that are almost injective
with respect to a, b, R0 .
     If the algorithm stops, its output is a finite list of morphisms (G; P) → (H; Q), containing
a post-conjugate every such almost injective morphism, and in particular, of any monomor-
phism (G; P) → (H; Q).

   The proof is similar to that of [DG08b, Theorem 4.4], which treats the case of torsion free
hyperbolic groups.

Proof. Consider the following problem: given R ≥ 0, and a family F of morphisms G → H,
does there exist a morphism ϕ : G → H which is short, not in F, sends the peripheral
structure P to Q, and is almost injective with respect to a, b, R.
     If hX|Ri is a presentation of G, morphisms ϕ : G → H correspond to solutions in H of
the system of equations R over the set of variables X. Since we have a solution of the word
problem, we can compute the ball BG (R). The injectivity on BG (R) can then be encoded
by inequations, the fact that ϕ(a), ϕ(b), ϕ(ab±1 ) have infinite order is encoded by inequations
saying that they have order > K, and the fact that hϕ(a), ϕ(b)i non-elementary is encoded
by an inequation saying [ϕ(a)N , ϕ(b)N ] 6= 1. The fact that ϕ maps the marked peripheral
structure P = (P1 , . . . , Pk ) to Q = (Q1 , . . . , Qk ) can be encoded using new variables z1 , . . . zk
and equations saying that zi conjugates the tuple ϕ(Pi ) to Qi . The fact that ϕ ∈            / F can
be encoded by a system of disjunctions of inequations. Shortness of ϕ consists of a Boolean
combination of conditions of the form ϕ(g) ∈ Lh where g ∈ {a, b, a±1 b±1 }, and h varies among
all elements of H of length 200δ.
     Thus, the existence of ϕ in the problem above is equivalent to the existence of a solution
for a Boolean combination of systems of equations and inequations with rational constraints,
which can be rewritten as a disjunction of systems of equations and inequations with rational
constraints. Since Lh is a quasi-isometrically embeddable rational subset (Lemma 3.6), this
is solvable by Theorem 2.7.
     The algorithm starts with the empty list F, and with a radius R = 0. If there is a short
morphism ϕ : (G; P) → (H; Q), not in F, and is almost injective with respect to a, b, R, it
adds it to the list F, and increments R by 1. It repeats this operation until there is no such
ϕ, in which case the algorithm stops and outputs F.
     By Proposition 3.8 any post-conjugacy class of morphism almost injective with respect to
a, b, R has a short representative. Therefore, if the algorithm stops at some value of R, every
post-conjugacy class of morphisms (G; P) → (H; Q) almost injective with respect to a, b, R
has a representative in F.
     Conversely, assume that the set C of post-conjugacy classes of morphisms (G; P) → (H; Q)
almost injective with respect to a, b, R0 is finite. When R > R0 , the post-conjugacy class of
any morphism added to F by the algorithm lies in C. Since there are only finitely many
short morphisms in each post-conjugacy class of morphism mapping a, b to a non-elementary
subgroup, the algorithm will stop.




                                                    37
3.2.3   Splittings of G
Proposition 3.14. There is an algorithm that, given a hyperbolic group (G; P) with a pe-
ripheral structure, enumerates all the non-trivial splittings of (G; P) over Zmax -subgroups.
    There is a similar algorithm enumerating all the non-trivial splittings of (G; P) over finite
subgroups.

Remark 3.15. In this statement, it makes no difference whether P is a marked or unmarked
peripheral structure.

Proof. List all presentations of G using Tietze transformations. Keep only those exhibiting
some non-trivial splitting over Zmax -subgroups relative to P (in which peripheral subgroups
appear as explicit subgroups of vertex groups) This is possible since by Lemma 2.8, it is
possible to algorithmically check whether the corresponding edge group is Zmax , and in the
case of an amalgam, that the vertex groups are not themselves Zmax .
   The case of splittings over finite groups is similar.

3.2.4    Proof of Theorem 3.2
We are now ready to prove Theorem 3.2.

Proof of Theorem 3.2. Recall that we are given two non-elementary hyperbolic groups with
marked peripheral structures (G; P), (H; Q), and that we are required to algorithmically find
a splitting of G over a finite or Zmax -subgroup, or a finite list a finite list F of morphisms
(G; P) → (H; Q), such that any monomorphism (G; P) → (H; Q) has a post-conjugate in F.
    Since G is non-elementary, we can find a, b ∈ G generating a non-abelian free subgroup.
Indeed, according to [Del96], there is a computable constant N such that for any two elements
a, b ∈ G, aN and bN generate a (maybe cyclic) free subgroup. Enumerating all pairs of N -
powers of elements of G and using a solution of the word problem in G, one can find a pair
with [aN , bN ] 6= 1, so haN , bN i is free of rank 2.
    Our algorithm runs two machines in parallel. The first machine is the algorithm given
by Proposition 3.13. It stops if and only if there exists R0 > 0 such that there are only
finitely many post-conjugacy classes of homomorphisms (G; P) → (H; Q) almost injective
with respect to a, b, R0 . If this machine stops first, we output a finite list F containing a
post-conjugate of any monomorphism (G; P) → (H; Q), and we stop and output F.
    In parallel, we run the a machine which lists all non-trivial splittings over a finite or Zmax -
subgroups as described in Proposition 3.14. If this machine produces such a splitting before
the first machine stopped, then we stop and output this splitting.
    Our algorithm always stops. Indeed, the rigidity criterion 3.1 implies that if the first
machine does not stop, then (G, P) has splitting over a finite or Zmax -subgroup, and it will
be found by the second machine.


4    JSJ decompositions
Given two G-trees T, T ′ , one says that T is elliptic with respect to T ′ if every edge stabiliser
of T fixes a point in T ′ . In this case, one can construct a blowup T̂ of T relative to T ′ as
follows. For each vertex v ∈ T , choose a Gv -invariant subtree Yv ⊂ T ′ in a G-equivariant way
(if Gv fixes no point, one can take the minimal Gv -invariant subtree), and for each oriented


                                                38
edge e of T , choose a point pe ∈ Yt(e) fixed by Ge . Then define T̂ as the minimal subtree
of the refinement of T obtained by replacing each vertex v ∈ T by Yv , and gluing back each
edge e on pe . The tree T̂ collapses to T and dominates T ′ .
    Consider A a family of subgroups of G, stable under conjugacy and taking subgroups.
A JSJ splitting of G over A is an A-tree which is A-universally elliptic (i. e. elliptic with
respect to any A-tree) and which dominates all A-universally elliptic splittings (see [GL09]).
The set of JSJ splittings is a deformation space called the JSJ deformation space over A.
Assuming that A is invariant under automorphisms (which will always be the case here), the
JSJ deformation space is invariant under Out(G).
    A vertex group Gv of a JSJ splitting is flexible if there exists some A-tree in which Gv
does not fix a point. Other vertex groups Gv are called rigid. Equivalently, Gv is rigid if and
only if (Gv ; Pv ) has no non-trivial splitting over A relative to the incident edge groups. Note
that in general, this notion of rigid vertex group is distinct from the notion in the rigidity
criterion, except when A = Zmax .
    Instead of G, one may start with a pair (G; P) with G finitely presented and P a finite
collection of finitely generated peripheral subgroups. An A-tree is relative to P if peripheral
subgroups are elliptic. We say that this is an (A, P)-tree. Then one can define the JSJ
deformation space of G relative to P in this context: universal ellipticity means ellipticity
with respect to (A, P)-trees, and JSJ splittings are maximal universally elliptic (A, P)-trees.

4.1   Virtually-cyclic JSJ decomposition
Consider G a one-ended hyperbolic group, and A the class of finite or two-ended subgroups.
Since G is one-ended, all A-trees have infinite edge stabilisers. Bowditch constructed a JSJ
splitting over A from the boundary of G in [Bow98, Theorem 0.1].
    A hanging bounded Fuchsian group of a graph of groups Γ over virtually cyclic groups, is
a vertex group (Gv ; Pv ) with its unmarked peripheral structure induced by Γ, such that Gv
has a structure of bounded Fuchsian group such that each group of Pv is a subgroup of a
boundary group of Gv .
    The flexible vertices (Gv ; Pv ) of Bowditch’s splitting are hanging bounded Fuchsian groups,
and more precisely, the peripheral structure Pv is precisely given by the boundary groups of
Gv . Note that bounded Fuchsian groups may have reflections.

4.2   Z-JSJ decomposition
Because splittings over two-ended subgroups with finite centre produce only a finite group of
Dehn twists, we want to study only Z-splittings, i.e. splittings over virtually cyclic subgroups
with infinite centre. Of course, if G has no 2-torsion, the class of Z-subgroup of G is its class
of two-ended subgroups.
    Take for A the class of all subgroups of Z-subgroups of G, and note that any splitting of
G over A is indeed a Z-splitting since G is one-ended. By [GL09], the JSJ deformation space
over A exists, we denote it by DZ . We denote by TZ the collapsed tree of cylinders of this
deformation space. By Proposition 2.33, this is an Out(G)-invariant splitting, and by Lemma
2.32, this is a Z-JSJ splitting.




                                               39
4.2.1   Z-JSJ decomposition of orbifold groups
Before describing TZ in general, we first consider the case of a hyperbolic orbifold Σ. This
might be a non-trivial decomposition if Σ has mirrors.
    Let’s first describe quickly what an orbifold Σ with mirrors looks like (see [Sco83] for
additional details). We view Σ as C/G where G ⊂ Isom(H2 ) is a non-elementary discrete
subgroup acting cocompactly on a closed convex set C ⊂ H2 with geodesic boundary. If g ∈ G
is a reflection, its set of fixed points is an infinite geodesic γ ⊂ H2 . The image in Σ of C ∩ γ
is a mirror of Σ. A mirror is either a circle or a segment, and is contained in the topological
boundary of Σ (i. e. the boundary when one forgets about the orbifold structure). If it is a
segment, its endpoints may be in another mirror, or in the image of a boundary component.
Boundary components of C are geodesics whose stabiliser is either infinite cyclic or infinite
dihedral. The corresponding subset of Σ is either a circle or a segment whose two endpoints
are singular points, lying in mirrors. We call such a subset a peripheral circle or segment.
    Thus, each component of the topological boundary of Σ is either a peripheral circle, or is
a union of mirrors and of peripheral segments.
    We now recall the structure of splittings of an orbifold group over virtually cyclic sub-
groups.
Lemma 4.1 ([MS84, Theorem III.2.6]). Let (G; B) be a hyperbolic orbifold group with its
peripheral structure, and T be a (G; B)-tree with virtually cyclic edge stabilisers.
    Then T is dual to a finite disjoint union of non-trivial two-sided simple 1-suborbifold of
Σ which don’t intersect the peripheral circles and segments.
    A non-trivial simple 1-suborbifold is the generalisation of a simple closed curve. It is the
image in the orbifold Σ of an infinite properly embedded topological line γ ⊂ C ⊂ H2 , with
cocompact stabiliser, and disjoint from its translates (i. e. g.γ ∩ γ = ∅ for all g ∈ G \ Stab(γ)).
Two sided means that Stab(Γ) does not exchange the two connected components of H2 \ γ.
Note that an embedded segment joining two mirrors is a two sided simple 1-suborbifold. An
embedded segment joining two cone points with cone angle π (or a mirror to a cone point
of angle π) is a one-sided simple sub-orbifold. In general, a two-sided simple 1-suborbifold
cannot contain any cone point.
Remark 4.2. Morgan-Shalen’s result is stated for surfaces, but it easily extends to orbifolds.
Indeed, there is a finite Galois covering Σ0 of Σ which is a surface, and the action of π1 (Σ)
is dual to a family of disjoint simple closed curves. Up to changing these curves to geodesics
with multiplicities in Σ, this family of curves is π1 (Σ0 )-invariant, and the result easily follows.
   Since a two-sided simple 1-suborbifold which intersects a mirror has infinite dihedral
fundamental group, we get:
Lemma 4.3. Let (G, B) be a hyperbolic orbifold group with its peripheral structure, and
G y T be a minimal action on a simplicial tree relative to B.
   If edge stabilisers of T are Z-groups, then T is dual to a finite disjoint union of two-sided
simple closed curves in Σ, which don’t intersect the peripheral subset, the conical singularities
and the mirrors of Σ.
   Let N be a regular neighbourhood of the union of mirrors and peripheral segments of Σ,
avoiding cone singularities. Then the curves of ∂N define a Z-splitting of G which we call
the mirrors splitting of G. This splitting might be trivial if N is connected and Σ \ N is an
annulus, or a disk with at most one cone point.

                                                 40
Proposition 4.4. The mirrors splitting of an orbifold with mirrors (G; B) is a Z-JSJ splitting
of (G; B).

Proof. By Lemma 4.1 any Z-splitting of G relative to B is dual to a curve in Σ \ N , so the
mirrors splitting is clearly Z-universally elliptic. Let’s prove maximality. Consider T another
Z-splitting of B, dual to some disjoint union of curves ci ⊂ Σ \ N . If some ci is not parallel to
the boundary of N , then by [Gui00, Lemma 5.3], there exists another non-peripheral simple
closed curve c′ ⊂ Σ \ N which intersects ci in an essential way, so T is not Z-universally
elliptic. It follows that all curves ci are parallel to the boundary of N , and T is dominated
by the mirrors splitting.

    Lemma 4.3 and Proposition 4.4 extend obviously to a bounded Fuchsian group G (i. e. an
extension of an orbifold group by a finite group F , see Section 2.6). Indeed, any minimal ac-
tion of G on a tree factors through G/F as the fixed subtree of F is non-empty and G-invariant.


4.2.2   Z-JSJ decomposition of hyperbolic groups
We now extend this description to the Z-JSJ decomposition of any one-ended hyperbolic
group. Recall a group of dihedral type is a virtually cyclic group with finite centre.

Proposition 4.5. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group, and T be a JSJ splitting over
two-ended subgroups. Then one can obtain a Z-JSJ splitting for G by

   • first refining T using the mirrors splitting of all its hanging bounded Fuchsian groups;

   • then collapsing all edges whose stabiliser is of dihedral type.

   In particular, flexible groups of the Z-JSJ splitting of G are hanging bounded Fuchsian
groups without reflection.

Remark 4.6. The same statement holds for a one-ended finitely presented group in general,
with essentially the same proof.

Proof. By definition, T is elliptic in any splitting of G over two-ended subgroups, and in
particular, in any Z-splitting of G. Let T̂ be the refinement of T obtained using the mirrors
splitting of its hanging bounded Fuchsian groups. By Proposition 4.4, T̂ is Z-universally
elliptic since in any Z-splitting of G, the boundary subgroups of the hanging bounded Fuchsian
groups of T are elliptic. It follows that the G-tree T0 obtained from T̂ by collapsing all edges
whose stabiliser is not in Z is Z-universally elliptic.
     Let T ′ be any Z-universally elliptic Z-splitting. Since T ′ is a splitting over two-ended
subgroups, rigid subgroups of T are elliptic in T ′ . Fix a hanging bounded Fuchsian group Gv
of T with its peripheral structure B. Every group of B is elliptic in T ′ by universal ellipticity
of T . Universal ellipticity of T ′ says that the action of (Gv , B) on T ′ is elliptic with respect to
any Z-action of Gv relative to B. By Proposition 4.4, the mirrors splitting of Gv dominates
Gv y T ′ . It follows that T̂ dominates T ′ . Let f : T̂ → T ′ be an equivariant map. Since edge
stabilisers of T ′ are in Z, f collapses any edge whose stabiliser is of dihedral type, and hence
factors through T0 .
     We prove that flexible vertices are hanging bounded Fuchsian groups without reflection.



                                                  41
    Vertex groups of T̂ are of three kinds: those coming from rigid vertex groups of T , which fix
a point in any virtually cyclic splitting, groups corresponding to the regular neighbourhoods
of the mirrors and peripheral segments in the mirror splitting of a hanging bounded Fuchsian
group, and hanging bounded Fuchsian groups without reflection coming from the mirrors
splitting. Vertex groups of the second kind are elliptic in any Z-tree by Proposition 4.4. All
edges groups of T̂ incident on a vertex of the third kind are Z-groups. Therefore, there are
not collapsed in T0 . It follows that a vertex group Gv0 of T0 that is not a hanging bounded
Fuchsian group without reflection is obtained by amalgamating along subgroups of dihedral
type, one or several vertices of the first or second kind.
    If two such vertices u, v in T̂ are joined by an edge e with Ge of dihedral type, then Gu
and Gv have a unique common fix point in any Z-tree S as Ge fixes no edge in S. It follows
that Gv0 itself fixes a point in any Z-tree. Hence it is not flexible.

   The following corollary applies for instance to an orbifold group with mirrors.
Corollary 4.7 (see also [Fuj02]). Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group. Then there is a
finite index subgroup Outf (G) of Out(G) which is an extension
                                                     n
                                                     Y
                         1 → Ab → Outf (Gv ) →             P M CG∗f (Si ) → 1
                                                     i=1

where Ab is virtually abelian, and P M CG∗f (Si ) is a finite index subgroup of P M CG∗ (Si ), the
pure extended mapping class group of a surface with boundary Si as defined in Section 2.5.
Proof. Let TZ be the tree of cylinders of the Z-JSJ deformation space. Then TZ is Out(G)-
invariant. Let Out′0 (G) be the finite index subgroup  Q of Out(G) acting as the identity on
Γ = TZ /G. We apply [Lev05a]. Let ρ : Out(G) → v∈V (Γ) Out(Gv ). For each vertex v ∈ Γ,
let Pv be a marking of the peripheral structure of Gv induced by the incident edge groups.
Then Outm (Gv , Pv ) is denoted by P M CG(Gv ) in  Q[Lev05a]. By [Lev05a, Prop 2.3], the kernel
of ρ is virtually abelian, and its image contains v∈Γ Outm (Gv ; Pv ) with finite index.
     For each rigid vertex v, Outm (Gv ; Pv ) is finite by the rigidity criterion 3.1. For each
flexible vertex v, (Gv ; Pv ) is isomorphic to a finite extension 1 → F → Gv → π1 (Σv ) → 1
where Σv is a 2-orbifold without mirror.
     Denote by P v the image of P in Σv . As recalled in Section 2.5, Outm (π1 (Σv ), P v ) ≃
P M CG∗ (Sv ) where Sv is the surface with weighted marked points underlying Σv .
     A finite index subgroup Ov of Outm (Gv ; Pv ) acts as the identity on F and maps with
finite kernel to P M CG∗ (Sv ). Since the set of equivalence classes of extensions of π1 (Σv ) by F
is finite, the image of Ov in P M CG∗ (Sv ) is a subgroup P M CG∗f (Sv ) of finite index. Define
Outf (G) as the preimage under ρ of the product of the Ov ’s where          v ranges over flexible
subgroups of Γ. The kernel Ab of the morphism Outf (G) ։ v P M CG∗f (Sv ) is a finite
                                                                     Q
extension of ker ρ, hence is virtually abelian.

4.3   Splittings over Zmax -subgroups
Recall that the class of maximal Z-subgroups of a hyperbolic group G is denoted by Zmax . We
are interested in splittings of a hyperbolic group G over Zmax -subgroups because of the rigidity
criterion (Proposition 3.1) witnessing their better behaviour with respect to automorphisms.
We start by generalities about Zmax -trees (i. e. actions of G on trees whose edge stabilisers
are Zmax ).

                                                42
Lemma 4.8. Let G be hyperbolic. Let T be a Zmax -tree, and v a vertex. For any Z-subgroup
H of G, either H ⊂ Gv or H ∩ Gv is finite.
   In particular, a subgroup of Gv is Zmax as subgroup of Gv if and only if it is Zmax as a
subgroup of G.

Proof. Assume H ∩ Gv is infinite. Then H is elliptic so H ⊂ Gu for some vertex u. If u = v
we are done. Otherwise, H ∩ Gv fixes the arc [u, v] and so does H since edge stabilisers are
Zmax . Thus H ⊂ Gv .

Lemma 4.9. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group. Let T, T ′ be Zmax -trees, such that edge
stabilisers of T are elliptic in T ′ .
    Then for each vertex v ∈ T , the action of Gv on its minimal subtree in T ′ has Zmax edge
stabilisers, and the blowup T̂ of T relative to T ′ (as constructed in the beginning of Section
4) is a Zmax -tree.

Proof. Denote by Yv ⊂ T ′ the minimal Gv -invariant subtree. Since G is one-ended, Edge
stabiliser of T̂ , and therefore of Gv y Yv are infinite. By construction, edge stabilisers of
T̂ and of Gv y Yv are of the form Gv ∩ Ge′ where v is a vertex of T and e′ an edge of T ′ .
Lemma 4.8 concludes.

    Now we introduce the Zmax -fold of a Z-tree T . Given an edge e of T , denote by Ĝe the
Zmax -subgroup of G containing Ge . We define the Zmax -fold of T as the minimal subtree of
the quotient T / ∼ where we define e ∼ e′ if e = g.e′ for some g ∈ Ĝe .
    To prove that T / ∼ is indeed a tree, we can construct it using sequence of folds. Consider
and edge e such that Ge        Ĝe . Since Ĝe is elliptic, one can find another such edge e such
that o(e) is fixed by Ĝe . The quotient of T by the equivariant equivalence relation generated
by e ∼ Ĝe .e is a fold (of type II in the terminology of [BF91a]), and is in particular a G-
tree. This new G-tree has strictly fewer orbits of edges with Ge           Ĝe , and we proceed by
induction. Note however that T / ∼ may fail to be minimal, and it may be a trivial splitting
even if T is not: this happens for example if T is dual to a splitting G = A ∗C Ĉ where Ĉ is
the Zmax -subgroup containing C.
    The following lemma describes vertex stabilisers of the Zmax -fold, and their peripheral
structure.
Lemma 4.10. Let T be a Z-tree, and T ′ its Zmax -fold. Consider a vertex v ′ ∈ T ′ with
non-elementary stabiliser, and {[Ge′1 ], . . . , [Ge′k ]} the peripheral structure of Gv′ induced by
T ′.
     Then there exists a vertex v ∈ T with peripheral structure {[Ge1 ], . . . , [Gen ]} for some
n ≥ k, such that,
   1. Ge′i = Ĝei for i ≤ k

   2. Gei is properly contained in Ĝei for k < i ≤ n

   3. Gv′ = Gv (∗Gei Ĝei )ni=1
Proof. We view T / ∼ as obtained by a finite sequence of folds as above. Each fold amounts to
change an edge of the graph of groups labelled Gu ∗Ge Gv to Gu ∗Ĝe Gv′ , where Ĝe is assumed
to be contained in Gu , and Gv′ = Ĝe ∗Ge Gv . It is clear from this construction that for each
vertex v ∈ T with peripheral structure {[Ge1 ], . . . , [Gen ]}, the stabiliser of its image v ′ ∈ T / ∼

                                                  43
is Gv′ = Gv (∗Gei Ĝei )ni=1 , its peripheral structure is {[Ĝe1 ], . . . , [Ĝen ]}. Now going from T / ∼
to the minimal subtree T ′ , some edges attached on v ′ may disappear.
    We have to check that for any such edge e′ and any preimage e in T , Ge                      Ge′ . Since
 ′
e does not lie in the minimal subtree of T / ∼, there is some vertex u ∈ T / ∼ which has′

valence one in (T / ∼)/G, and with Gu′ ⊂ G′e . Consider u a preimage of u′ in T , and note
that Gu ⊂ Gu′ is a Z-group. As the map T → T / ∼ induces the identity on the quotient
graphs, u has valence one in T /G, so Gu fixes no other vertex that u by minimality of T .
The group Ge′ = Ĝe is elliptic in T , and fixes no other vertex than u as it contains Gu . So
Gu = Ge′ , and Ge′ fixes no edge of T . Therefore, Ge Gu = Ge′ .

4.4    JSJ decomposition over Zmax -subgroups: the tree TZmax
We want to construct a JSJ splitting for Zmax -splittings. In the torsion-free case, this is related
to what Sela calls the essential JSJ decomposition of G. For simplicity reasons, we will rather
use a variant of the Zmax -JSJ decomposition: a Z-universally elliptic Zmax -decomposition
maximal for domination.
Proposition 4.11. Let G be a hyperbolic group. Consider the set X of all Z-universally
elliptic Zmax -trees (up to equivariant isomorphism).
    Then the set of largest elements of X for domination is a (non-empty) deformation space
denoted by DZmax . Moreover, DZmax contains the Zmax -fold of any Z-JSJ splitting.
    We define TZmax as the collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ of any T ∈ DZmax .
    When there is a risk of ambiguity, we denote TZmax = TZmax (G).
Remark 4.12. By Lemma 2.32, TZmax is itself a Zmax -decomposition in DZmax .
    We will describe flexible vertices of TZmax as orbisockets, see section 5.
Remark 4.13. A few (technical) words about the difference between a Zmax -JSJ decomposition
and the one considered above. Consider (G, B) is the fundamental group of a once punctured
Klein bottle Σ. Splittings over Zmax -subgroups of (G, B) correspond to two-sided simple
closed curves not bounding a Möbius band. But Σ has a unique homotopy class of two-sided
simple closed curve not bounding a Möbius band. This means that the Zmax -JSJ splitting of
(G, B) is the splitting corresponding to this curve, which differs from TZmax which is a trivial
splitting. In other words, while it is true that any simple closed curve c carrying a Zmax -
subgroup (i. e. not bounding a Möbius band) has positive intersection number with some
other simple closed curve c′ ([Gui00, th. 3.5]), there may not exist such curve c′ carrying a
Zmax -subgroup. This example extends to the case of a Klein bottle with a single cone point,
and these are the only examples among orbifolds of conical type.

Proof. Consider T, T ′ two Z-universally elliptic Zmax -trees. In particular, T is elliptic with
respect to T ′ . The blowup of T relative to T ′ is Z-universally elliptic (because the stabiliser
of any of its edge is contained in an edge stabiliser of T or T ′ ), and is a Zmax -tree by Lemma
4.9. This clearly implies that if nonempty, the set DZmax of maximal Z-universally elliptic
Zmax -trees is a deformation space.
    We now prove the second assertion (which implies that DZmax is non-empty). Let TZmax
the Zmax -fold of a Z-JSJ splitting TZ . Since every edge group of TZmax contains an edge
group of TZ with finite index, TZmax is Z-universally elliptic.
    We need to prove that TZmax dominates any other Z-universally elliptic Zmax -splitting T ′ .
By maximality of the Z-JSJ splitting, there exists an equivariant map f : TZ → T ′ . Up to

                                                    44
                        j1
                       ×n1
                                                                    j3
                                                                    ×1
                       S1

                       S2                                                S3 = B3

                      ×n2                        G0
                        j2

      Figure 3: An orbisocket with two proper sockets (n1 , n2 6= 1), and an improper one.


subdividing TZ , we can assume that f maps each edge to an edge or a vertex. We claim that f
factors through TZmax . Consider two equivalent edges of TZ , so that e = g.e′ for some g ∈ Ĝe .
If e is collapsed under f , so is e′ . If not, Ĝe stabilises f (e) because T ′ is a Zmax -splitting, so
f (e′ ) = f (e). Thus f factors through the Zmax -fold of TZ and the proposition follows.

Proposition 4.14. Let G1 , G2 be two one-ended hyperbolic groups. Let Γi be the quotient
graph of groups of TZmax (Gi ), and identify Gi with π1 (Γi , v).
    Then any isomorphism ϕ : G1 → G2 is induced by an isomorphism of graphs of groups
Φ : Γ1 → Γ2 (in the sense of definition 2.19).

Proof. Given any action G1 y T , denote by ϕ∗ T the action G2 y T induced by precom-
position by ϕ−1 . The definition of the deformation space DZmax being canonical, for any
T1 ∈ DZmax (G1 ), the action ϕ∗ T1 lies in DZmax (G2 ). Going to the collapsed tree of cylinders,
we get that ϕ∗ TZmax (G1 ) = TZmax (G2 ), in other words, that there is a ϕ-equivariant isomor-
phism between TZmax (G1 ) and TZmax (G2 ). By Lemma 2.22, there exists an isomorphism of
graphs of groups Γ1 → Γ2 .

4.5     Orbisockets as flexible vertices
We now study orbisockets, which, as we will see, occur as flexible vertices of TZmax . The
most basic example is the fundamental group of a surface with boundary, to which one has
added some roots to the elements representing the boundary components. In [Sel97], Sela
calls these groups “sockets” in the context of vertex groups of a JSJ decomposition. We see it
as a deformation of the English word “socks” and of the french word “socquettes” (meaning
low socks): a pair of pants comes with socks, that are attached to boundary components, see
Figure 3. Unfortunately, as we will see, les socquettes ne sont pas toujours propres.
     Let G0 be a bounded Fuchsian group without reflection, with its peripheral structure
B = {[B1 ], . . . , [Bn ]}. Let k ∈ {0, . . . , n}, and consider some Z-groups S1 , . . . , Sk with
monomorphisms ji : Bi → Si for i = 1, .., k. We assume that no ji is onto (see Figure 3,
where n = 3 and k = 2). Let O be the multiple amalgam O = G0 (∗Bi Si )ki=1 (i. e. a tree
of groups with a central vertex G0 and one edge for each i ∈ {1, . . . , k}). For notational
convenience, we define Si = Bi and ji = id for i ≥ k + 1; all the groups S1 , . . . , Sn and
their conjugates in O are called sockets. The proper sockets are the conjugate of the groups
S1 , . . . , Sk (characterised by Bi 6= Si ), the other ones are improper.



                                                  45
Definition 4.15 (Orbisocket). An orbisocket is a group (O; PO ) with unmarked peripheral
structure obtained from a bounded Fuchsian group without reflection G0 as a tree of groups
O = G0 (∗Bi Si )ki=1 as described above, and whose peripheral structure PO consists of all im-
proper sockets, possibly with additional proper sockets.
    A decomposition of O as a tree of groups as above is a socket decomposition of O.
    A hanging orbisocket in a graph of groups Γ is a vertex v ∈ Γ such that the vertex group
Gv together with its peripheral structure Pv induced by Γ is isomorphic to some orbisocket
(O; PO ).
   We also say that (Gv , Pv ) is a hanging orbisocket.
   Starting with an orbifold group and a boundary subgroup hbi, the amalgam consisting in
adding a square root to b is equivalent to gluing a Möbius band to the orbifold. In general,
we say that Si is a Möbius socket if
   • Bi has index 2 in Si , and Bi and Si have the same maximal normal finite subgroup F
     (F is also the maximal finite normal subgroup of G)
   • Si does not lie in the peripheral structure of O.
In this case, G′0 = G0 ∗Bi Si is itself a bounded Fuchsian group without reflection, and one can
define a new orbisocket with same group and same peripheral structure, but with G′0 as the
Fuchsian group, and S1 , . . . , Si−1 , Si+1 , . . . , Sk as sockets. Doing this for all Möbius sockets,
one can transform an orbisocket into an orbisocket without Möbius socket. This shows that
the socket decomposition of O is not determined by O and its peripheral structure. However,
we will see in the next section that once Möbius sockets have been removed, the socket
decomposition is unique.
Definition 4.16. A vertex v of TZmax is flexible if there exists a Zmax -tree in which Gv is
not elliptic.
Proposition 4.17. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group.
   Then, any flexible vertex of TZmax is a hanging orbisocket.
Proof. Let TZ be a Z-JSJ tree, T the Zmax -fold of TZ (see section 4.4).
    We first prove that if v is a flexible vertex of T , then v is a hanging orbisocket. Write
Gv = Gṽ (∗Gẽi Ĝẽi )ni=1 for some ṽ ∈ TZ as in Lemma 4.10, and consider a Zmax -tree S in
which Gv is not elliptic. Since flexible vertices of TZ are hanging bounded Fuchsian group
without reflection (Proposition 4.5), we need only to prove that ṽ is flexible. Assuming by
contradiction that Gṽ is rigid, then Gṽ fixes a point u ∈ S, and groups Ĝẽi fix some ui ∈ S.
If ui 6= u, then Gẽi fixes the arc [ui , u], and so does Ĝẽi since S is a Zmax -tree. It follows that
Gv fixes u, a contradiction.
    Now recall that the tree TZmax is, by definition, the collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ of T .
Since T and Tc∗ = TZmax are Zmax -trees in the same deformation space (Lemma 2.32), they
have the same non-elementary vertex stabilisers (see [GL07, Cor. 4.5] for this general fact).
Moreover, as they are two Zmax -trees in the same deformation space, T and Tc∗ induce the
same peripheral structure on such a vertex stabiliser Gv . Indeed, the stabilisers of edges
incident on v are characterised as infinite groups of the form Gv ∩ Gu with Gu 6= Gv non-
elementary vertex stabilisers (see [GL07, Prop. 4.10 and Def. 4.11] for a general statement
or more details). Since flexible vertices of T are hanging orbisockets, so are flexible vertices
of Tc∗ .


                                                   46
Remark 4.18. In fact, some hanging Fuchsian groups of TZ may fail to split over Zmax -
subgroups although they split over some Z-group (this is for instance the case of a twice
punctured projective plane). They give rigid vertices of TZmax .
Lemma 4.19. Let Γ be a Zmax -splitting, and v ∈ Γ be a hanging orbisocket. Then Gv is
elliptic in TZmax .
Proof. Let Γ′ be obtained from Γ by refining v using its socket decomposition. Let v ′ ∈ Γ′
be the corresponding hanging Fuchsian vertex. By [GL09, Prop. 7.16], G′v is elliptic in any
Z-universally elliptic splitting, hence fixes some vertex u ∈ TZmax . Each socket group Si of v ′
fixes a vertex ui ∈ TZmax as some finite index subgroup fixes u. If ui 6= u, then Si fixes [ui , u]
as edge stabilisers of TZmax are Zmax . It follows that Gv fixes u.

Lemma 4.20. Let (O; PO ) be a hanging orbisocket of TZmax . Consider a socket decomposition
O = G0 (∗Bi Si )pi=1 of (O; PO ) without Möbius sockets. Let T be a Zmax -decomposition of G
in which O is not elliptic.
    Then the minimal O-invariant subtree YO of T is dual to a finite set of curves in the
following sense: it is obtained by first refining the socket decomposition of O using a splitting
of G0 dual to a finite set of disjoint non-peripheral 2-sided simple closed curves in the orbifold
underlying G0 , and then by collapsing all the edges of the socket decomposition.
Proof. Viewing TZmax as the Zmax -fold of a Z-JSJ splitting TZ , Lemma 4.10 implies that all
(proper and improper) sockets Si of O have a finite index subgroup fixing an edge of TZ and
are therefore universally elliptic, hence elliptic in T . In particular, boundary subgroups Bi of
G0 are elliptic in T . Let Y0 ⊂ YO ⊂ T be the G0 -minimal subtree. By Lemma 4.3, G0 y Y0
is dual to a finite set c1 , . . . , cn of non-peripheral disjoint simple closed curves in the orbifold
Σ0 underlying G0 . Because each of these curves is non-peripheral, the Zmax -subgroup of G
containing its stabiliser is contained in G0 . This implies that two distinct O-translates of Y0
have no edge in common.
    Let S ′ be the refinement of the socket decomposition dual to the curves c1 , . . . , cn , and
S be obtained from S ′ by collapsing all edges of the socket decomposition. Since each Bi
fixes a point ui ∈ Y0 , the corresponding socket Si fixes some point, hence fixes ui since edge
stabilisers of T are Zmax . This means that the inclusion Y0 → YO extends to an equivariant
map f ′ : S ′ → YO which is constant on edges of the socket decomposition. This map thus
factors into a map f : S → YO . Since f is injective on Y0 and since distinct translates of Y0
have no edge in common, f locally injective, hence an isomorphism.

4.6    The orbisocket decomposition is canonical
In this section, we prove that the socket decomposition of an orbisocket is canonical as long
as there is no Möbius socket. We prove this by showing that this decomposition is actually a
Z-JSJ decomposition. We first prove one-endedness.
    One says that G is one-ended relative to a peripheral structure P if (G; P) has no non-
trivial splitting over a finite group (relative to P).
Proposition 4.21. Let O be an orbisocket, with its peripheral structure PO . Then O is
one-ended relative to PO .
   In particular, if O has no improper socket, then O is one-ended (absolutely).
   The following lemma will be proved below.

                                                  47
Lemma 4.22. Consider a non-trivial decomposition of G into an amalgam G = A∗C B or an
HNN extension G = A∗C with C virtually cyclic. If G is one-ended relative to C, C1 , . . . , Cn ,
then it is one-ended relative to C1 , . . . , Cn .
   In particular, if A and B are one-ended relative to the conjugates of C, C1 , . . . Cn contained
in A or B, then G is one-ended relative to C1 , . . . , Cn ..
Proof of Proposition 4.21. Let O be an orbisocket groups, G0 < O be the corresponding
bounded Fuchsian group, B1 , . . . , Bn be the boundary subgroups of G0 , and S1 , . . . , Sk be the
improper sockets of O. We know that G0 is one-ended relative to B1 , . . . Bn . Lemma 4.22
says that G0 ∗Bn Sn is one-ended relative to B1 , . . . Bn−1 , and repeating this argument, that
O is one-ended relative to B1 , . . . Bk . Since all improper sockets B1 , . . . , Bk appear in PO ,
the lemma follows.

Proof of Lemma 4.22. We prove the contraposition of the first assertion. Assume that G is
not one-ended relative to C1 , . . . , Cn . Let G y S be a minimal Bass-Serre tree of a Stallings-
Dunwoody decomposition of G relative to C1 , . . . , Cn , i. e. a splitting over finite groups relative
to C1 , . . . , Cn , maximal for domination (existence follows from relative Dunwoody accessibility
see for instance [GL09, Th. 4.8]).
    Let T be the Bass-Serre tree of the decomposition G = A∗C B (or G = A∗C ). Assume first
that some vertex stabiliser Gv of S is not elliptic in T . Let M ⊂ T be the minimal subtree,
and consider e an edge of M . By one-endedness of Gv relative to the conjugate of C1 , . . . , Cn
it contains, Gv ∩ Ge is infinite. Since Ge is conjugate to C, and thus virtually cyclic, a finite
index subgroup of C is contained in Gv , so C is elliptic in S, so G is not one-ended relative
to C, C1 , . . . , Cn .
    Assume now that every vertex stabiliser of S is elliptic in T , so S dominates T . Then one
may factor S → T into a collapse map S → S0 followed by a sequence of folds S0 , S1 , . . . , Sn =
T as in [BF91b]. Each Si is non-trivial because T is non-trivial. Let i0 be the last index such
all edge stabilisers of Si are finite.
    Then there is an edge e of Si0 , and some g ∈ Go(e) of infinite order which fixes the image
of e in Si0 +1 . Then hgi fixes an edge in T , so it has finite index in some conjugate of C. Since
g is elliptic in Si0 , so is C, and Si0 is a splitting of G with finite edge stabilisers relative to
C, C1 , . . . , Cn .

   Since an orbisocket is one-ended (relative to its peripheral structure), we now consider its
Z-JSJ decomposition.
Lemma 4.23. Let (G, P) be a hyperbolic group with a peripheral structure in Z. Assume that
there is a splitting of (G, P) over a Z-group Ge , whose Bass-Serre tree S is not Z-universally
elliptic.
    Then, either Ge is in Zmax , or is of index 2 in its maximal virtually cyclic subgroup, with
same maximal finite normal subgroup.
Proof. Let T be a virtually-cyclic JSJ decomposition of G relative to P. By [GL09, Th.
7.33(2)], its flexible vertices are hanging bounded Fuchsian groups (maybe with reflections).
Since S is not universally elliptic, some flexible subgroup Gv of T is not elliptic in S. Since
Gv is a finite extension of an orbifold group π1 (Σ), the action of Gv on its minimal subtree in
S is dual to a non-peripheral simple two-sided 1-suborbifold γ contained in Σ. Let C be the
preimage in Gv of its fundamental group. Up to conjugacy, one can assume C ⊂ Ge . Thus,
C has infinite centre so γ intersects no mirror.

                                                  48
    Since C is not universally elliptic, γ does not bound an annulus with a circular mirror
(neither does it bound a regular neighbourhood of the mirrors and peripheral segments of
Σ). If γ does not bound a Möbius band or a disk with two cone points of angle π, then C
is Zmax (even maximal virtually cyclic). Otherwise, C has index 2 in its maximal virtually
cyclic subgroup, with same maximal normal finite subgroup Ĉ (and Ĉ has infinite centre only
in the case of a Möbius band). The lemma follows.

Proposition 4.24. Let (O; PO ) be an orbisocket. Let O y T be the Bass-Serre tree of a
socket decomposition of O without Möbius socket.
    Then T is a Z-JSJ splitting of O relative to PO , and it is its own tree of cylinders.

Proof. As discussed above, O is one-ended relative to PO . Consider O y T the Bass-Serre
tree of the sockets decomposition of O, and O y TJSJ a tree in the Z-JSJ deformation space
of (O; PO ). We use the same notations as in Definition 4.15: G0 is the Fuchsian group with
boundary subgroups Bi , and Si are the sockets.
     We claim that T is universally elliptic (for the class of Z-splittings of O relative to PO ).
Assume on the contrary that the edge group Bi is not Z-universally elliptic, and note that
Si is the maximal Z-subgroup of O containing Bi . Then by Lemma 4.23, either the inclusion
Bi ⊂ Si is of Möbius type in contradiction with the hypothesis, or Bi = Si . If Bi = Si ,
[Si ] lies in the peripheral structure PO , and is universally elliptic since we consider splittings
relative to PO . Thus T is Z-universally elliptic, and therefore dominated by TJSJ .
     By [GL09, Prop. 7.4], the hanging Fuchsian group (G; P) fixes a point in TJSJ . Since
Bi ⊂ Gv and Si contains Bi with finite index, Si also fixes a point in TJSJ . Thus, T dominates
TJSJ , and T is a Z-JSJ splitting of (O; PO ).
     Since a boundary subgroup of an orbifold group is malnormal in it, each cylinder of T is
the ball of radius 1 around a point stabilised by a conjugate of Si . It immediately follows
that T is its own tree of cylinders.



5     Isomorphism problem for orbisockets
5.1   Recognition of basic orbisockets
Consider an orbisocket (O, PO ) with its peripheral structure.

Definition 5.1. We say that (O, PO ) is a basic orbisocket if it admits no non-trivial Zmax
relative splitting, and if O has at least one improper socket.

   Let us remark that if an orbisocket admits no non-trivial Zmax relative splitting, and has
only proper sockets, then it is a rigid one-ended hyperbolic group (see Proposition 4.21).
   Basic orbisockets are the hanging orbisockets one gets in a maximal Zmax -splitting of a
non-rigid one-ended hyperbolic group. The goal of this section is to describe all possible basic
orbisockets, and to provide an algorithm recognising them.

Theorem 5.2. There exists an algorithm which takes as input a hyperbolic group (G; P) with
an unmarked peripheral structure (given by a presentation and generating sets of peripheral
subgroups) and which decides whether (G; P) is isomorphic to a basic orbisocket.
   If this is the case, the algorithm provides a socket decomposition of (G; P).


                                                49
Remark 5.3. In particular, when (G; P) is an orbisocket, the theorem allows one to know
which sockets are proper.
   Several cases will be considered, and Theorem 5.2 will follow from Propositions 5.15, 5.16
and 5.19.
Remark 5.4. Although (G; P) has a finite group of outer automorphisms, one cannot use
directly the solution of the isomorphism problem for rigid hyperbolic pairs (Theorem 3.2) to
answer this question because there are infinitely many candidate orbisockets as we have no a
priori bound on the index of the sockets.

5.1.1    The underlying orbifold
Lemma 5.5. For every orbisocket (O, PO ), there is a socket decomposition (possibly with
Möbius sockets) such that the orbifold underlying the decomposition is orientable.

Proof. If the underlying orbifold Σ of O is non-orientable, then Σ contains an embedded
Möbius strip. Cutting Σ along its boundary gives a new representation of O as a socket de-
composition with one additional Möbius socket. Since this operation decreases the complexity
of the underlying orbifold (measured for instance by the opposite of its Euler characteristic
relative to the boundary), this operation can be performed only finitely many times.

   From now on, we only consider orbisocket decompositions of (O, PO ) whose underlying
orbifold Σ is orientable.

Lemma 5.6. Consider a basic orbisocket (O, PO ). Then it has an orbisocket decomposition
whose underlying 2-orbifold Σ is either

   • a disk with two cone points (type 1),

   • a twice punctured sphere with one cone point (type 2),

   • or a thrice punctured sphere (type 3).

Moreover it has at most three, and at least one, peripheral subgroups.

Proof. An orientable orbifold of conical type with positive genus, or containing more than
three boundary components or conical singularities contains a non-peripheral simple closed
curve. This defines a Zmax -splitting of (O, PO ), contrary to the definition of a basic orbisocket.
Since Σ has at most three boundary components, the orbisocket has at most three peripheral
subgroups. By definition of a basic orbisocket, at least one socket is improper, so there is at
least one peripheral subgroup.

5.1.2   Algebraic characterisation
A basic orbisocket (O, PO ) is a virtually free group with a particular peripheral structure.
We aim to write O as a graph of finite groups, and to read its peripheral structure there.

Lemma 5.7. Let (G; P) be a hyperbolic group with an unmarked Z-peripheral structure.
   Then (G; P) is isomorphic to a basic orbisocket of type 1 (as defined in Lemma 5.6) if
and only if



                                                50
                                                                            hσ ,F i       hF,σ2 i
                                                                                                     
                                                                               1
   • G splits as a graph of finite groups (not relative to P) G = π1               •        •         , with F
                                                                                       F
      normal in G, σi ∈
                      / F , with σ1 and σ2 not both of order 2 in G/F .

   • P = {[hσ1 σ2 , F i]}

Proof. If (O, PO ) is a basic orbisocket of type 1 over the bounded Fuchsian group G0 , then it
has at most one socket, and by definition of a basic orbisocket, it has at least one improper
socket. Therefore, the socket decomposition of O is the trivial decomposition O = G0 , and
its peripheral structure consists in the boundary subgroups of G0 . Since G0 /F ≃ Z/r1 ∗ Z/r2 ,
the two assertions follows.
    Conversely, assume that (G; P) satisfies both points of the lemma. Then G/F is the
fundamental group of a disk with two cone points of angles 2π/r1 , 2π/r2 where ri is the order
of σi in G/F and the boundary subgroup is conjugate to hσ1 σ2 i. It follows that G is a basic
orbisocket with one improper socket hσ1 σ2 , F i and no proper socket.

Lemma 5.8. Let (G; P) be a hyperbolic group with an unmarked Z-peripheral structure.
  Then (G; P) is isomorphic to a basic orbisocket of type 2 if and only if

   • G splits as a graph of finite groups (not relative to P)

                                               hσ, F i       F1
                                                                      
                                  G = π1                          F1
                                                         F
      with σ ∈
             / F and σ normalises F .

   • Denote by H1 = F1 ∗F1 the HNN extension on the right. Then there exists b ∈ H1 , with
     translation length n > 0 in the corresponding Bass-Serre tree, such that b normalises F ,
     and

        – either P = {[hbσ, F i], [H1 ]}
        – or P = {[hbσ, F i]}.

      If F = F1 and n = 1, then it is the first possibility which occurs.

If these conditions are satisfied, the decomposition O ≃ hb, σ, F i ∗hb,F i H1 is an orbisocket
decomposition, the sockets being H1 and hbσ, F i.

Remark 5.9. To define σ and b, we identify G with π1 (Γ, τ ) where τ is the maximal subtree
of the graph of finite groups Γ above. Once this is done, this identifies hσ, F i and F1 ∗F1 with
well defined subgroups of G (not just independent conjugacy classes).

Proof. Assume that O is a basic orbisocket of type 2. The corresponding Fuchsian group G0
can be written as G0 = hσ, F i∗F hb, F i with F normal in G0 , σ of finite order corresponding to
the cone point, and with boundary subgroups conjugate to hb, F i and hσb, F i. By definition,
a basic orbisocket has at least one improper socket, say at bσ. Thus, it has at most one
proper socket, and the socket decomposition of O can be written as O ≃ G0 ∗hb,F i S. Since
S is a Z-group, it can be written as an HNN extension S = F1 ∗F1 where F1 is its maximal
finite subgroup. It follows that O ≃ hσ, F i ∗F S ≃ hσ, F i ∗F (F1 ∗F1 ). The peripheral structure
consists of the improper socket hσbi, maybe together with the socket S = H1 . The assertions
of the lemma follow.

                                                  51
   Assume conversely that G satisfies all the points of the lemma. Using the trivial splitting
H1 ≃ hb, F i ∗hb,F i H1 , one can write
                         G ≃ G0 ∗hb,F i H1 with G0 = hσ, F i ∗F hb, F i.
Now F is a normal subgroup of G0 since it is normalised by b and σ. Thus, G0 /F ≃ hσ̄i∗hb̄i ≃
Z/rZ ∗ Z is the fundamental group of twice punctured sphere with one cone point of angle
2π/r where r is the order of the image σ̄ of σ in hσ, F i/F , and the boundary subgroups are
conjugate to hbi and hbσi. Thus G0 is a bounded Fuchsian group whose boundary subgroups
are hb, F i and hbσ, F i. The amalgam G ≃ G0 ∗hb,F i H1 is therefore an orbisocket decomposition
for G, with a socket corresponding to H1 , and an improper socket corresponding to hbσ, F i.
The first socket is improper if and only if H1 = hb, F i i. e. if n = 1 and F = F1 (recall that
F is normalised by b). The hypothesis on P guarantees that each peripheral subgroup is a
socket group and that every improper socket lies in P. It follows that (G; P) is isomorphic to
a basic orbisocket of type 2.
Lemma 5.10. Let (G; P) be a hyperbolic group with an unmarked Z-peripheral structure.
  Then (G; P) is isomorphic to a basic orbisocket of type 3 if and only if
   • G splits as a graph of finite groups
                                                          DF1 F2 z
                                                                           
                                    G = π1       F1        z• F • D   F2


   • Consider H1 = F1 ∗F1 and H2 = F2 ∗F2 the left and right HNN extensions. There exist
     elements b1 ∈ H1 and b2 ∈ H2 normalising F , with positive translation length n1 , n2
     such that P consists of [hb1 b2 , F i], maybe together with [H1 ] or [H2 ] (or both); if Fi = F
     and ni = 1, then necessarily [Hi ] ∈ P.
If these conditions are satisfied, on can get an orbisocket decomposition as O ≃ H1 ∗hb1 ,F1i
hb, σ, F i ∗hb2 ,F2 i H2 , the sockets being H1 , H2 and hb1 b2 , F i.
Definition 5.11. We say that O is of type 3a if F 6= F1 , F2 , 3b if F = F2          F1 , and 3c if
F = F1 = F2 .
Remark 5.12. The translation length ni is also the index of hbi , Fi i in Hi .
   The proof is similar to the previous cases, we leave it to the reader.

5.1.3   The rigid case
Recall that the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space of G is the set of G-trees with finite
edge stabilisers and finite or one-ended vertex groups Recall that a graph of groups Γ is
reduced if for all oriented edge e such that the edge morphism ie is onto, e is a loop (i. e.
o(e) = t(e)). We say that a deformation space is rigid if it contains a unique reduced tree. If
T is this unique reduced tree, we also say that T is rigid. We will use Levitt’s characterisation
of rigid deformation spaces, stated here under an additional hypothesis.
Theorem 5.13 ([Lev05b, Theorem 1]). Let G y T be a reduced G-tree and Γ the corre-
sponding graph of groups. Assume that no edge group is strictly contained in a conjugate of
itself, (this holds if G is hyperbolic, and edge groups are finite or virtually cyclic).
    Then the deformation space of T is rigid if and only if for each vertex v ∈ Γ, and for
each pair of distinct oriented edges e1 , e2 incident on v such that ie1 (Ge1 ) is contained in a
conjugate of ie2 (Ge2 ),

                                                      52
   • either e1 = e2 (i. e. e1 and e2 are the two orientations of a loop)

   • or e2 is a loop and Gv = ie2 (Ge2 ) = ie2 (Ge2 ), and the only oriented edges incident on v
     are e1 , e2 , e2 .

   When a deformation space is rigid, the unique reduced tree it contains is invariant under
automorphisms of G that preserve this deformation space.

Lemma 5.14. Let (O; PO ) be a basic orbisocket. Then the absolute (i. e. not relative to PO )
Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space of O is rigid if and only if O is of type 1, 2, or 3a as
defined in Lemma 5.6 and Definition 5.11.

Proof. The splittings described in Lemmas 5.7, 5.8, and 5.10 are graphs of finite groups so are
in the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space. One checks that under our hypotheses, they
are reduced except for type 2 orbisockets when F = F1 . In this case, by collapsing an edge,
we get the following reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition O = hσ, F i∗F . Applying
Levitt’s criterion, we immediately see that in each case, the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation
space is rigid.
    If O is of type 3b or 3c, F2 = F ⊂ F1 , and by collapsing the middle edge of the graph
of groups
       J t of Lemma 5.10, one gets the following reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition
 F1
       t• J F
       F1       which is not rigid by Levitt’s result.

Proposition 5.15. There exists an algorithm which takes as input a hyperbolic group with
unmarked peripheral structure (G; P) and which decides if (G; P) is isomorphic to a basic
orbisocket of type 1, 2, or 3a. If it is, it finds a socket decomposition for (G; P).

Proof. First, if (G, P) is an basic orbisocket, then its peripheral structure consists of at most
three non conjugate Zmax -subgroups. This can be checked by Lemma 2.8, thus we can assume
that P contains at most 3 conjugacy classes of peripheral subgroups.
    Using Gerasimov’s algorithm, we can compute Γ a Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition G.
We can check whether it is reduced, and make it reduced if it is not. Using Levitt’s criterion
(Lemma 5.13), one can check whether it is rigid. We can assume it is rigid by Lemma 5.14.
By rigidity, any isomorphism G → O to a basic orbisocket group should map the computed
decomposition to the unique reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition of O, described in
Lemma 5.14. So if the reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition of G does not have the
required form, we are done. Furthermore, the topology of the graph of groups tells us which
type of orbisocket we should look for.
    Assume first that Γ = A1 ∗F A2 is an amalgam of finite groups, so that G has to be of
type 1. If P has more that 1 conjugacy class of peripheral subgroups, if F is not normal
in one of the two vertex groups, or if A1 /F or A2 /F is not cyclic, we know that (G; P) is
not an orbisocket of type 1, and not an orbisocket at all. So rewrite Γ = hσ1 , F i ∗F hσ2 , F i.
If both σ1 and σ2 have order 2 modulo F , G is virtually cyclic, and is not an orbisocket.
We have finitely many choices for σ1 and σ2 , and we can check whether for some choice,
P = {[hσ1 σ2 , F i]}. If this is not the case, then we know by Lemma 5.7 that (G; P) is not an
orbisocket since by rigidity of the deformation space, the groups hσi , F i and F are determined
up to simultaneous conjugation. If this is the case, then the two assertions of Lemma 5.7 hold,
and G is an orbisocket of type 1.



                                               53
    Assume now that Γ = A ∗F (F1 ∗F1 ) or Γ = A∗F , so that G has to be of type 2. If P has
more that 2 conjugacy class of peripheral subgroups, if F is not normal in A, or if A/F is not
cyclic, (G; P) is not an orbisocket.
    We first consider the case where Γ = A ∗F (F1 ∗F1 ). We claim that we can determine the
translation length n of the element b (that we still don’t know) appearing in Lemma 5.8.
Consider G ≃ Z the abelianization of G modulo its torsion. If (G; P) is an orbisocket of type
2, then the image in G of one of the peripheral subgroups has index n, and the image of
the other (if any) has index 1. Since these indices can be computed, this allows us to find
n. One can list all the finitely many elements b of translation length n in F1 ∗F1 , and list all
possibilities for the choice of σ. Then for each such choice, we check whether P is conjugate
to {[hbσ, F i]} or to {[hbσ, F i], [hb, F i]}. Then by Lemma 5.8, (G; P) is a socket of type 2 if
and only if there was one successful choice.
    When Γ = A∗F , we will compute all possible Γ̂ = A ∗F (F1 ∗F1 ) that give Γ when made
reduced. When this is done, we proceed as above for each possible Γ̂. First, if Γ̂ exists, then
F1 = F since otherwise Γ̂ would be reduced. It follows that F should be normal in G. This
fact can be checked so we can assume that F ⊳ G. Let t0 be a stable letter of the HNN
extension Γ. Given another stable letter t = at0 for some a ∈ A, we can write G = A ∗F hF, ti,
hence produce the blow up Γ̂t = A ∗F (F ∗F ) where t is a stable letter of the HNN extension
F ∗F . One can easily check that every possible blowup Γ̂ of Γ coincides with such a Γt , so all
possible blowups can be listed.
                                    DF1 F2 z
   Assume finally that Γ = F1       z• F • D    F2   with F   F1 , F2 , so that (G, P) is candidate
to be a type 3a orbisocket. Let G ≃ Z2 the abelianization of G modulo its torsion. Consider
h1 , h2 two elements of translation length 1 in F1 ∗F1 and F2 ∗F2 respectively. Their image
h1 , h2 in G is a basis of G, which does not depend on the choice of hi up to sign. By rigidity
of the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space, F1 ∗F1 and F2 ∗F2 don’t depend on Γ (up to
simultaneous conjugation), so hi does not depend on Γ up to sign. On the other hand,
Lemma 5.10 says that if (G; P) is an orbisocket of type 3, then P consists of [hb1 b2 i], maybe
together with [F1 ∗F1 ] and/or [F2 ∗F2 ]. The groups conjugate to [Fi ∗Fi ] project in G to hhi i,
                            ±n1 ±n2
and hb1 b2 i projects to hh1 h2 i where ni is the translation length of bi in Fi ∗Fi . This
means that from the peripheral structure P of G, we can read n1 and n2 . Now, there are only
finitely many possible candidates for b1 and b2 , namely bi = f hi±ni for some f ∈ Fi . For each
possible choice of b1 and b2 , there remains to check whether the peripheral structure has the
form required by 5.10.

5.1.4    The semi-rigid case
Proposition 5.16. There exists an algorithm which takes as input a hyperbolic group with
unmarked peripheral structure (G; P), and which decides if (G; P) is isomorphic to a basic
orbisocket of type 3b and in this case, gives a socket decomposition of (G; P).
Proof. A basic orbisocket of type 3b has a decomposition as a graph of finite groups Γ of the
form                                                      
                                              D F1 F z
                               O = π1 F 1     z•    •D   F
                                                     F

with F F1 . For lack of a better name, we call such a decomposition a nice decomposition.
   We note that O has infinitely many distinct such nice decompositions (distinct as actions
on trees). Moreover, the fact that P satisfies the characterisations for being orbisockets of

                                               54
Lemma 5.10 depends on the choice of the nice decomposition.
    Let T be the Bass-Serre tree of Γ, and T0 be obtained by collapsing the orbit of the left
                                                                 t
and middle edges. It is dual to the HNN extension O = H1 • J F . We claim that T0 does
not depend of the nice decomposition used to define it. Indeed, F1 is the unique maximal
finite subgroup up to conjugacy, so H1 is well defined up to conjugacy as the normaliser of F1 .
Since the elliptic subgroups of T0 are the conjugate of the subgroups of H1 , the deformation
space of T0 is independent of choices. By Levitt’s rigidity criterion, T0 is the unique reduced
tree in its deformation space, which proves the claim.
Lemma 5.17. One can decide if a hyperbolic group G has a nice decomposition, and produce
one if it does.

Proof. If G has a nice decomposition,
                                J t       then it has a reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decompo-
                          F1     •
                                t J   F
sition Γred of the form         F1       with F     F1 , obtained by collapsing the middle edge.
We claim that all reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decompositions of G are of this form. This is
because any two such decompositions are related by slide moves (see section 2.8), and the only
possible slide moves (which consist in sliding the edge labelled F along the edge labelled F1 ),
give a new decomposition of the same form. Using Gerasimov’s algorithm [DG08a, Theorem
1.3], one can compute a reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition of G, and check whether
it has the same form as Γred .
    But this is not enough to conclude that G has a nice decomposition.
    The argument above shows that the tree T0 obtained by collapsing the edge labelled F1
in Γred does not depend on choices. The decomposition T0 /G can be computed, and has
               t
the form H1 • J F with H1 a Zmax -subgroup with maximal normal finite subgroup F1 . We
claim that G has a nice decomposition if and only if the two images of F in H1 are conjugate
in H1 . Since this condition is easy to check, one can decide if G has a nice decomposition (and
produce one if it does). The claim is clear if T0 comes from a nice decomposition. Conversely,
if the two images of F in H1 are conjugate in H1 , one can assume that they are equal up to
                                                                                  H1       Fz
post-conjugating the edge morphism, which allows us to blow up T0 into            •        •D   F   and
                                                                                       F
then into a nice decomposition.

    Now we can assume that G has a nice decomposition Γ. Denote by T its Bass-Serre tree.
    Say that (h1 , h2 ) is a basis of Γ if the translation length of h1 and h2 is 1, and there exists
an edge e = v1 v2 in the preimage of the middle edge of Γ such that the axis of hi contains vi
(in other words, h1 , h2 are simultaneously stable letters of the two HNN extensions of Γ).
    Such a basis (h1 , h2 ) defines Hi for i = 1, 2 as the Zmax -subgroup containing hi , F1 (resp.
F ) as the maximal finite normal subgroup of H1 (resp. H2 ). In particular, H1 = hh1 , F1 i and
H2 = hh2 , F i.
Lemma 5.18. Consider (h1 , h2 ) a basis coming from a nice decomposition of G as above.
     Then (h′1 , h′2 ) is another basis coming from some nice decomposition Γ′ if and only if
(h1 , h′2 )g = (h±1
  ′                      ±1
                 1 f, h2 k1 ) for some g ∈ G, k1 ∈ NH1 (F ) and f ∈ F1 where NH1 (F ) denotes
the normaliser of F in H1 .

Proof. Assume that (h′1 , h′2 ) is another basis. Denote by H1′ , H2′ , F1′ , F ′ the subgroups of G
defined analogously using (h′1 , h′2 ) (namely, Hi′ is the Zmax -subgroup containing h′i , etc.). Up
to conjugating (h′1 , h′2 ) by some g ∈ G, we may assume that H1′ = H1 , and in particular


                                                 55
F1′ = F1 . Since h1 and h′1 give two generators of the cyclic group H1 /F1 , h′1 = h±1
                                                                                    1 f for some
                          ′
f ∈ F1 . The elements h2 and h2 both have translation length 1 in T0 , and their axis in T0
contain the vertex u1 ∈ T0 fixed by H1 . Conjugating (h′1 , h′2 ) by some element of H1 , we may
assume that the axes of h2 and h′2 share an edge incident on u1 so in particular, F = F ′ . It
follows that h′2 = h±1                                                 ′
                      2 k1 for some k1 ∈ H1 . Since both h2 and h2 normalise F , so does k1 .
The conclusion follows.
    Conversely, assume (h′1 , h′2 )g = (h±1    ±1
                                         1 f, h2 k1 ) with f, k1 , g as above. A conjugate of a
basis being a basis, we can assume g = 1. Since h2 is a stable letter of the HNN extension
T0 /G, so is h′2 . Since h2 and k1 normalise F , so does h′2 . It follows that one can blow up
                                                                            H1       Fz
                                                                                                with h′2 a stable
                                    t
the HNN extension G ≃ H1 • J              F   corresponding to T0 into      •        •D     F
                                                                                 F
letter of the HNN extension on the right. This last decomposition can be blown up into a
                                        D F1 F z
nice decomposition Γ′ = F1              z• F • D    F   of which (h′1 , h′2 ) is a basis.

      Recall that we have computed Γ a nice decomposition of (G, P) and (h1 , h2 ) a basis. To
simplify the discussion, assume that P consists of exactly three conjugacy classes of subgroups
{[P0 ], [P1 ], [P2 ]}. Given (h′1 , h′2 ) a basis coming from another nice decomposition, denote by
H1′ , F1′ , H2′ , F ′ the subgroups defined by (h′1 , h′2 ) as before the statement of Lemma 5.18.
                                                                       ′g           ′g
Writing (h′1 , h′2 )g = (h±1           ±1
                               1 f, h2 k1 ), we get that H1 = H1 , F1 = F1 and F
                                                                                                     ′g = F (but
   ′g
H2 6= H2 in general).
      Then one can rephrase Lemma 5.10 as follows: (G, P) is a basic orbisocket of type 3b if
and only if there exists a basis (h′1 , h′2 ) associated to some nice decomposition Γ′ , b1 ∈ H1′
normalising F ′ , b2 ∈ H2′ normalising F ′ such that P = {[hF ′ , b1 b2 i], [hh′1 , F1′ i], [hh′2 , F ′ i]}. Up
to re-indexing the Pi ’s, we may as well require that [P0 ] = [hF ′ , b1 b2 i], [P1 ] = [hh′1 , F1′ i],
[P2 ] = [hh′2 , F ′ i].
      Writing b2 = h′n      2 ′                  ′       ′
                          2 f for some f ∈ F , we claim the we can determine n2 up to sign.
Indeed, if (O, PO ) is a basic orbisocket of type 3b, write it as a the fundamental group of
a nice decomposition Γ′ . Consider O ≃ Z the abelianization of O modulo its torsion and
   ′                                                                                                           ′
H 1 ⊂ O the image of H1′ . Since H1′ is conjugate to H1 , one can compute the group O/H 1
                                                                                                   ′
from Γ. If [P0 ] = [hb1 b2 , F ′ i], then |n2 | is the index of the image of P0 in O/H 1 , and can be
computed.
      To decide if (G, P) is indeed a basic orbisocket, we have to decide the existence of a basis
(h′1 , h′2 ), and elements b1 , b2 as above. We view this as disjunction of systems of equations
as follows: We view the relation (h′1 , h′2 )g = (h±1                     ±1
                                                                 1 f, h2 k1 ) as a finite family of systems of
                                                       ′   ′
two equations relating some variables h1 , h2 , k1 , g in G, parametrised by f ∈ F , and h1 , h2
being constants. We include additional disjunctions of systems of equations saying that k1
normalises F1 (i. e. lies in H1 ), and another disjunction of systems of equations saying that
k1 normalises F .
      Now introduce two new variables b1 , b2 , subject to a disjunction of systems of equations
saying that bg1 normalises F1 (so that b1 ∈ H1′ ), and a disjunction of equations b2 = h′2 ±n2 f2g
parametrised by f2 ∈ F , |n2 | having been already computed. We add disjunctions of systems
of equations saying that bg1 and bg2 normalise F . Write Pi = hai , Ci i where Ci ⊳ Pi is
the maximal finite normal subgroup (one can compute such ai , Ci ). The condition [P0 ] =
[hb1 b2 , F ′ i] (resp. [P1 ] = [hh′1 , F1′ i], [P2 ] = [hh′2 , F ′ i]) translates into a disjunction of systems
                                                                          −1
of equations saying that C0g0 = F g (resp. C1g1 = F1g , C2g2 = F g ) and a disjunction of
                                               −1                                       −1


equations (b1 b2 )g0 = a±1    0 c0 , (resp. h1
                                                   ′ g1 = a±1 c , h′ g2 = a±1 c ) indexed by c ∈ C (resp.
                                                             1 1        2      2 2                 0      0



                                                        56
c1 ∈ C1 , c2 ∈ C2 ) where g0 (resp. g1 , g2 ) is a new variable. This way, we get a disjunction
of systems of equations, and the existence of a solution in G is equivalent to the fact that
(G; P) is an orbisocket of type 3b. Since one can solve systems of equations in virtually free
groups by [DG09], one can decide whether O is an orbisocket of type 3b. By proposition 5.10,
one can get an orbisocket decomposition of G from a solution of this system of equations:
G ≃ H1 ∗hb1 ,F i hb1 , b2 , F i ∗hb2 ,F i H2 .

5.1.5    The flexible case
Proposition 5.19. There exists an algorithm which takes as input a hyperbolic group with
unmarked peripheral structure (G; P), and which decides if (G; P) is isomorphic to a basic
orbisocket of type 3c and in this case, gives a socket decomposition of (G; P).

Proof. If O is an orbisocket   J t      of type 3c, any of its reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decompositions
                        F        • J F
has the form                   t
                                F      , and G is an extension of the free group F2 by the finite normal
subgroup F .
      Using Gerasimov’s algorithm, compute a reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition of
G. We can check whether this decomposition has the right form, so we can assume this is the
case.
      By lemma 5.10, (G; P) is an orbisocket of type 3c if and only if there exists h1 , h2 ∈ G
whose image in F2 is a free basis, and b1 ∈ hh1 , F i, b2 ∈ hh2 , F i, such that P = {[hb1 b2 , F i]}
maybe together with [hh1 , F i] and/or [hh2 , F i]. To simplify, assume that P = {[P0 ], [P1 ], [P2 ]}
has 3 elements. One can first check that each Pi contains F . Choose ai ∈ Pi with Pi = hai , F i
      From a reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition, compute h1 , h2 ∈ G (stable letters of
the two HNN extensions) whose image in F2 is a free basis. Now by Dehn-Magnus-Nielsen
theorem about bases of F2 , the pair (h′1 , h′2 ) projects to a free basis of F2 if and only if
[h′1 , h′2 ]g = ([h1 , h2 ]±1 )f for some g ∈ G and some f ∈ F . Moreover, given such h′1 , h′2 ∈ G,
bi ∈ hh′i , F i if and only if [bi , h′i ] = fi for some fi ∈ F . Finally, for such b1 , b2 the peripheral
structure has the right form if and only if ag00 = (b1 b2 )±1 f0′ , ag11 = h±1      ′        g2   ±1 ′
                                                                                 1 f1 , and a2 = h2 f2 , for
                                     ′   ′  ′
some g0 , g1 , g2 ∈ G and f0 , f1 , f2 ∈ F . Thus we get a disjunction of systems of equations with
unknowns h1 , h2 , g, b1 , b2 , g0 , g1 , g2 , parametrised by the finitely many values of the parameters
f, f1 , f2 , f0′ , f1′ , f2′ . It has a solution if and only if (G, P) is an orbisocket of type (3c). By
[DG09], this can be decided algorithmically.

5.2     Isomorphism problem for orbisockets
In this section, we solve the isomorphism problem for (non-basic) orbisockets, given orbisocket
decompositions as input. We will reduce the problem to the case of bounded Fuchsian groups
and apply Proposition 2.17 which solves the isomorphism problem for bounded Fuchsian
groups.

Theorem 5.20. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for orbisockets with marked
peripheral structure.
    More precisely, there exists an algorithm which takes as input two orbisocket groups
(O1 ; M1 ), (O2 ; M2 ), with marked peripheral structure, an orbisocket decomposition of both,
and decides whether (O1 ; M1 ) and (O2 ; M2 ) are isomorphic (as groups with marked peripheral
structure).


                                                    57
    Moreover, there is an algorithm which takes as input an orbisocket group (O; M), with
marked peripheral structure, and an orbisocket decomposition of it, and computes genera-
tors for Outm (O; M) (the group of outer automorphisms preserving the marked peripheral
structure).

Proof. Let us denote by Γ1 , Γ2 the graph of groups encoding the socket decompositions. One
can algorithmically remove Möbius sockets from Γi as in section 4.5. By Proposition 4.24,
Γi is a Z-JSJ decomposition of Gi relative to Mi . Moreover, any orbisocket decomposition
is its own tree of cylinders, so any isomorphism between (Oi ; Mi ), should be induced by
an isomorphism of the graph of groups Γi . By Corollary 2.29, there remains to solve the
isomorphism problem for vertex groups with a marking of their peripheral structure. This
follows from Lemma 2.9 for virtually cyclic group, and from Proposition 2.17 for hanging
bounded Fuchsian groups.
    For the second assertion, we use Corollary 2.30. Since generating sets of centralisers are
computable, it is enough to solve the extended isomorphism problem for vertex groups with
a marking of their peripheral structures. This also follows from Lemma 2.9 and Proposition
2.17.


6     Computation of the Zmax JSJ decomposition, and isomor-
      phism problem for one-ended hyperbolic groups
6.1   Computation of a maximal Zmax -splitting
The following proposition computes decomposition of G over Zmax -subgroups which is max-
imal for domination. This is not yet a JSJ decomposition: for instance, if G is an orientable
surface group, one would get a pants decomposition.

Proposition 6.1. There is an algorithm that takes as input a one-ended hyperbolic group G,
and which computes a maximal Zmax -splitting of G.

Remark 6.2. A splitting of G over Zmax edge groups is maximal if and only if for each vertex
group Gv with the induced peripheral structure Pv , (Gv ; Pv ) has no non-trivial Zmax -splitting.
Indeed, denote by T a maximal Zmax -tree, and assume that a vertex group Gv has a splitting
relative to Pv whose edge groups are Zmax in Gv . Then these edge groups are Zmax in G by
Lemma 4.8, The converse is Lemma 4.9.

Proof. Starting with the trivial decomposition of (G; P), assume that we have already con-
structed some Zmax -decomposition Γ of (G; P). One can check if this decomposition can be
refined at a vertex v by applying Corollary 3.4 to the vertex group Gv with its peripheral
structure Pv induced by the incident edge groups. Doing this for each vertex of Γ, one can
check whether Γ is maximal, in which case we are done.
    If Γ is not maximal, one can produce a Zmax -splitting of some (Gv ; Pv ) by Proposition
3.14, and use it to refine Γ. This refinement a Zmax -splitting by Lemma 4.8.
    Since the obtained splittings are reduced in the sense of Bestvina-Feighn [BF91a], this
refinement process has to stop: a maximal splitting is then produced.




                                               58
6.2   Computation of the JSJ tree TZmax
Proposition 6.3. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group. Then one can compute TZmax (G)
(as defined in section 4.4).
    Moreover, one can determine which vertices of this decomposition are flexible, and find
their orbisocket decomposition.

Proof. By Lemma 2.34, one can compute the collapsed tree of cylinders of any given Z-tree.
Therefore, we need only to produce some splitting in the deformation space of TZmax .
    Start with a maximal Zmax -tree T as produced by Proposition 6.1. One can compute
Tc the collapsed tree of cylinders of T . By Lemma 2.32, Tc∗ is a Zmax -splitting in the same
  ∗

deformation space as T , hence is also maximal, so we can assume that T = Tc∗ .
    Note that T dominates TZmax : the blowup S of TZmax relative to T (as defined at the
beginning of Section 4) is a Zmax -tree by Lemma 4.9. By maximality of T , S lies in the same
deformation space as T , and since S dominates TZmax , so does T .
    Denote by Γ = T /G the quotient graph of groups. For each vertex v ∈ Γ, let Pv be the
unmarked peripheral structure Γv induced by Γ. Let VB ⊂ Γ be the set of vertices v such
that (Γv ; Pv ) is a basic orbisocket. Since T is a maximal Zmax -splitting, for each v, (Γv ; Pv )
have no non-trivial Zmax -splitting. By Definition 5.1, it follows that an orbisocket (Γv ; Pv )
of Γ is basic if and only if it has at least one improper socket. The set VB is computable by
Theorem 5.2, and one can compute its socket decomposition of the corresponding orbisockets.
In particular, one can decide which elements of Pv are proper sockets.

                                          Junction segment


                                                                        Junction segment     π
                   proper
                  socket
                                                                Basic
                              Basic       Junction segment
                    S1       orbisocket                      orbisocket
                                                                                             π
                                                                                  Dihedral
       non-orbisocket                                                              vertex
           vertex
                                      Hanging orbisocket of T


                                  Figure 4: Junction segments

    Note that a disk with two cone points of angle π has infinite dihedral fundamental group
D∞ , and its boundary subgroup B is is a cyclic subgroup of index 2 (the unique Zmax -
subgroup in D∞ ). Corresponding to this situation, we call a pair (D; B) a dihedral orbisocket
if D is virtually cyclic of dihedral type, and B < D is its unique Z-subgroup of index 2. A
hanging dihedral orbisocket v of Γ is a terminal vertex whose peripheral structure induced by
Γ makes it a dihedral orbisocket.
    A junction segment of Γ is (see Figure 4):

   • either a segment [u, v] = e1 ∪ e2 of length 2 (maybe with u = v) such that u, v ∈ VB
     are hanging basic orbisockets in which Γe1 and Γe2 are improper sockets, such that the
     midpoint w of [u, v] has valence 2 in Γ and Γe1 = Γw and Γe2 = Γw .


                                                59
    • or an edge e = [u, v] where u ∈ VB is a hanging basic orbisocket in which Γe is an
      improper socket, and v is a hanging dihedral orbisocket.

    Since for each v ∈ VB we know which edges correspond to proper sockets, we can compute
effectively the set of junction segments of Γ.
    Let T be the G-tree obtained from T by collapsing all edges whose image in Γ lie in a
junction segment. One can compute the corresponding graph of groups decomposition Γ of
G. We will prove that T lies in the same deformation space as TZmax . The following lemma
says that new vertices of Γ are hanging orbisockets.
Lemma 6.4. Assume that (G; {[S1 ], . . . , [Sp ]}) and (G′ , {[S1′ ], . . . , [Sq′ ]}) are two orbisockets
(maybe not basic) in which S1 and S1′ are improper sockets. We allow one of them (but not
both) to be a dihedral orbisocket as above.
    Assume that S1 is isomorphic to S1′ . Then for any isomorphism between S1 and S1′ ,

                             (G ∗S1 =S1′ G′ ; {[S2 ], . . . , [Sp ], [S2′ ], . . . , [Sq′ ]})

is itself an orbisocket, and one can compute an orbisocket decomposition from orbisocket
decompositions of G and G′ .
    Similarly, if S1 and S2 are two improper sockets of G which are isomorphic, then the HNN
extension
                                   (G∗S1 =S2 ; {[S3 ], . . . , [Sp ]})
is an orbisocket, and one can compute an orbisocket decomposition from orbisocket decompo-
sitions of G and G′ .

Proof. Consider the socket decompositions G = G0 (∗Bi Si )pi=1 and G′ = G′0 (∗Bi′ Si′ )qi=1 of G, G′ .
Let F ⊳ G0 (resp. F ′ ⊳ G′0 ) be the maximal normal finite subgroup of G0 (resp. of G′0 ). Since
the socket S1 is improper, S1 is an extension of Z by F , and F is the maximal finite subgroup of
S1 . Similarly, F ′ is the maximal finite subgroup of S1′ , so F is necessarily mapped to F ′ under
the identification of S1 with S1′ . Thus, F = F ′ is normal in the group H0 = G0 ∗S1 =S1′ G′0 , and
H0 is a bounded Fuchsian group with peripheral structure {[B2 ], . . . , [Bp ], [B2′ ], . . . , [Bq′ ]}). It
follows that (G ∗S1 =S1′ G′ , {[S2 ], . . . , [Sp ], [S2′ ], . . . , [Sq′ ]}) is an orbisocket.
     The same verification can be done for HNN extensions, or when one of the sockets is
dihedral.

    Applied inductively, Lemma 6.4 says that the vertex groups of T which are not elliptic in T
are orbisockets. Since T dominates TZmax , and since by Lemma 4.19, any hanging orbisocket
is elliptic in TZmax , it follows that T dominates TZmax .
    There remains to prove that TZmax dominates T . Since flexible vertices of TZmax are
hanging orbisockets, other vertices of TZmax fix a point in T , so we need only to prove that
hanging orbisockets of TZmax fix a point in T . Let v be a hanging orbisocket of TZmax such
that Γv not elliptic in T , and Yv ⊂ T be the minimal Γv -invariant subtree.
    By Lemma 4.20, the action Γv y Yv is dual to a finite set of non-peripheral disjoint 2-sided
simple closed curves c1 , . . . cn in the orbifold Σv underlying the orbisocket Γv . In particular,
for each edge e of TZmax incident on v, Ge fixes a unique point pe ∈ Yv . Let T̂ be the G-tree
obtained by blowing up each orbisocket vertex v of TZmax into Yv , and by attaching the edges
e incident on v to pe . We denote by Ŷv the copy of Yv in T̂ . Since for every non-orbisocket
vertex w of TZmax , Γw fixes a point in T , T̂ dominates T . Since T̂ is a Zmax -splitting (Lemma


                                                           60
4.9), and T is a maximal one, if follows that T and T̂ are in the same deformation space.
Thus, Tc∗ = T̂c∗ , and since T = Tc∗ , T = (T̂ )∗c .
    Now we will describe T using a description of cylinders of T̂ . Since Γv y Ŷv is dual to a
family of non-peripheral curves in Σv , no edge stabiliser of Γv y Ŷv is commensurable with a
peripheral subgroup of Γv . It follows that each cylinder of T̂ is either contained in Ŷv , or has
no edge in Ŷv .
    We describe the tree of cylinders of Ŷv . One can assume that no two curves ci bound an
annulus since removing one of them does not change the tree of cylinders Ŷv . Each connected
component U of Σv \ c1 ∪ · · · ∪ cn is a sub-orbifold. Let H be the preimage in Γv of π1 (U ),
a bounded Fuchsian group if H is not virtually cyclic. If π1 (U ) is cyclic, then U is a Möbius
band since there are no annuli, which is excluded by the fact that edge stabilisers are Zmax .
If π1 (U ) is infinite dihedral then U is a disc with two cone points of angle π. Since Σ has no
mirror, these are the only possibilities. Finally, one easily checks that the tree of cylinders
(Yv )c is obtained from Yv by barycentric subdivision of all edges not incident on such a dihedral
component U .
    Using (Yv )c instead of Yv to blow up TZmax into T̂ , we get a tree in the same deformation
space, so we still have T = (T̂ )∗c . On the other hand, one easily checks that T̂ is its own
collapsed tree of cylinders (see [GL08, prop. 5.7] for instance), i. e. T̂ = (T̂ )∗c = T .
    Now it is clear from the description above that all vertices of Ŷv are hanging orbisockets,
dihedral, or subdivision vertices, and that all edges of Ŷv are junction edges. It follows that
the map T → T collapses Ŷv to a point, so Γv is elliptic in T , and TZmax dominates T .
    This proves that one can compute TZmax . Since each flexible vertex is coming from the
collapse of junction edges in T , we can compute an orbisocket decomposition by Lemma 6.4
from orbisocket decompositions of basic orbisockets.

6.3   Isomorphism problem for one-ended hyperbolic groups
Theorem 6.5. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for the class of one-ended
hyperbolic groups:
   there is an explicit algorithm that, given two one-ended hyperbolic groups, terminates
and indicates whether they are isomorphic, and which computes generating systems of their
automorphism groups

Proof. Let G, G′ be two one-ended hyperbolic groups. Compute Γ, Γ′ the graph of groups of
their TZmax splittings, determine its flexible vertices, and compute an orbisocket decomposition
of all flexible vertex groups (Prop. 6.3). Since TZmax is a canonical splitting, any isomorphism
G → G′ is induced by an isomorphism between the graphs of groups Γ, Γ′ (Prop. 4.14).
    By Corollary 2.29, deciding whether Γ and Γ′ are isomorphic reduces to solve the iso-
morphism problem for vertex groups with a marking of their peripheral structure defined by
their edge groups. This is done by Th. 3.2 if v is a rigid vertex, and by Th. 5.20 if v is an
orbisocket vertex.
    For the second assertion, since TZmax is a canonical splitting (Prop. 4.14), Out(G) =
OutΓ (G). Corollary 2.30 allows us to conclude since the extended isomorphism problem for
rigid groups and orbisockets is solvable by Corollary 3.5 and Theorem 5.20.

   Applying Lemma 2.14, we deduce from Theorem 6.5 the following corollary:




                                                61
Corollary 6.6. There is an effective algorithm that, given two one-ended hyperbolic groups,
with marked peripheral structure consisting of finite subgroups, determines whether they are
isomorphic.
    There is an effective algorithm that, given a one-ended hyperbolic group (G, P) with marked
peripheral structure consisting of finite subgroups, determines a generating set of Outm (G, P).


7    Groups with several ends
In this section, we explain how to reduce the isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups with
several ends to the isomorphism problem between one-ended hyperbolic groups.
Theorem 7.1. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for the class of hyperbolic
groups: there is an explicit procedure that, given two hyperbolic groups (possibly with torsion
and several ends), indicates whether they are isomorphic.
    There is an explicit procedure that given a hyperbolic group G, computes a generating set
for Out(G).
   Recall that the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space of G is the set of G-trees with finite
edge stabilisers and finite or one-ended vertex groups. We view this deformation space as a
graph D whose vertex set V (D) is the set of reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decompositions,
and whose set of edges E(D) is the set of pairs of trees {T, T ′ } related by a slide move. This
graph is connected as this deformation space is non-ascending [GL07, Th. 7.2]. Recall that
Out(G) acts by precomposition on the deformation space, and that this action extends to the
graph D.
   We are almost going to compute the quotient graph D/Out(G): we are going to compute
exactly its vertex set, and its edge set up to some uncertainty.
Lemma 7.2. The action of Out(G) on D has finite quotient.
Proof. We view a vertex of D/Out(G) as a graph of groups Γ up to graph of groups isomor-
phisms. Since a slide move doesn’t change the number of vertices and edges of a graph of
groups, and since D is connected by slides moves, there are finitely many possibilities for the
graph Γ. Similarly, the isomorphism types of vertex and edge groups is preserved by a slide
move, so there are finitely possibilities for the assignments v 7→ Γv and e 7→ Γe . But since
there are only finitely many conjugacy classes of finite subgroups in the vertex groups, there
are only finitely many conjugacy classes of possible edge morphisms ie : Γe → Γv . If follows
that D/Out(G) is finite.

Lemma 7.3. There is an effective procedure that, given two graphs of groups decomposition
of two hyperbolic groups, whose Bass-Serre trees are in the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation
space, indicates whether there is an isomorphism of graph of groups between them.
    Moreover, there is an effective procedure that, given a graph of groups decomposition of a
hyperbolic group in Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space, computes a generating set of its
automorphism group.

Proof. We use Corollary 2.29 to prove the first assertion. Indeed, the edge groups (which
are finite) have finite computable automorphism groups, and the set of possible isomorphisms
between them is computable. The vertex groups are one-ended hyperbolic, hence by Corollary
6.6, we have a solution to the marked isomorphism problem for the class of vertex groups

                                              62
(the peripheral structure is that of the adjacent finite edge groups, marked by a tuple of
generator). Thus Corollary 2.29 applies.
    The second assertion is a consequence of Corollary 2.30, since Theorem 6.5 allows us
to compute a generating set of the automorphisms of the vertex groups with their marked
peripheral structure, and Lemma 2.5 allows us to compute a system of generators of the
centraliser of any finite group in a hyperbolic group.

   Given T ∈ D a reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition, we denote by OutT (G) its
stabiliser in Out(G), and by Lk(T ) the set of edges of D incident on T .

Lemma 7.4. There is an effective procedure that, given a reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decom-
position T of a hyperbolic group G, computes a finite set ET ⊂ Lk(T ), such that OutT (G).ET =
Lk(T ).

Proof. Denote by Γ = T /G a quotient graph of groups. Recall (see section 2.8) that a slide
move is determined by two oriented edges e1 , e2 in Γ, terminating at the same vertex v, and
by an element g ∈ Γv such that ie1 (Γe1 ) ⊂ ie2 (Γe2 )g . If u denotes the other endpoint of e2 ,
after the slide, the edge e1 is replaced by an edge e′1 incident on u, and with monomorphism
ie′1 = ie2 ◦ i−1
              e2 ◦ adg ◦ ie1 .
                                      −1
    In this case, the group ie1 (Ge1 )g is a subgroup of the finite group ie2 (Γe2 ). One can
                                                                 −1
decide which subgroups F ⊂ ie2 (Γe2 ) are equal to ie1 (Ge1 )g for some g ∈ Γv . If there
exists such an element g0 ∈ Gv , the set of all other such elements is NF .g0 where NF is the
normaliser of F in Γv .
    By Lemma 2.31, all slide moves with g ∈ ZF .g0 where ZF is the centraliser of F in Γv , are
equivalent under the stabiliser of T . This ensures that, in order to enumerate representatives
of possible slide moves, it suffices to compute a set of representatives for NF /ZF (which is
finite since Aut(F ) is finite). This is done by Lemma 2.5.

Lemma 7.5. There is an effective procedure that, given a hyperbolic group G, computes a
finite set V0 ⊂ V (D) such that Out(G).V0 = V (D), and no two points of V0 are in the same
orbit under Out(G).

Proof. Using Gerasimov’s algorithm [Ger, DG08a], one can compute a certain reduced G-tree
T0 in the Stallings-Dunwoody deformation space.
    Proceed by induction, and assume that one has computed a finite set Sn ⊂ V (D) such
that Out(G).Sn contains all vertices of D at distance ≤ n from T0 , and no two points of Sn
are in the same orbit under Out(G).
    By Lemma 7.4, for each T ∈ Sn , we can compute a finite set NT of representatives of its
neighbours. Since one canScheck whether two trees are in the same Out(G)-orbit by Lemma
7.3, one can choose from T ∈Sn NT one representative of each orbit not in the orbit of Sn .
Then we can take Sn+1 ⊃ Sn to be the set obtained by adding these elements to Sn .
    Since D/Out(G) is finite, the sequence Sn stabilises. We claim that if Sn+1 = Sn , then
Out(G).Sn = D. Indeed, Sn′ = Sn for all n′ > n, but by connectedness of D, any T ∈ D lies
in Out(G).Sn′ for some n′ . Therefore, one can output V0 = Sn .

Remark 7.6. The two previous lemmas can be interpreted as the computation of a finite graph
D0 whose vertex set is D/Out(G), and whose link at T ∈ D0 is given by ET . The natural
map D0 → D is an isomorphism the vertex sets, and is surjective on the edges of D.


                                               63
Lemma 7.7. Let G act on a connected graph K. Let V0 be a set of orbit representatives for
the vertices. For all v ∈ V0 , let Sv be a generating set of the stabiliser of v, let Ev ⊂ Lk(v)
be such that Sv .ESv = Lk(v), and for all e = vw ∈ Ev , let αe ∈ G be such that αe .w ∈ V0 .
Denote by SV = v∈V0 Sv and SE = {αe |e ∈ Ev , v ∈ V0 }.
    Then G is generated by SV ∪ SE .

    This is elementary, but convenient for our purpose.

Proof. Let G′ = hSV ∪ SE i. Consider γ ∈ G, choose v0 ∈ V0 , and take v = γv0 . Consider
γ ′ ∈ G′ such that d(γ ′ v, V0 ) is minimal. If γ ′ v ∈ V0 , then γ ′ v = v0 , so γ ′ γ ∈ hSv0 i and γ ∈ G′
so we are done. Otherwise, consider a shortest path v1 , v2 , . . . , vn = γ ′ v from V0 to γ ′ v. Let
e = v1 v2 be its first edge. There exists e1 ∈ Ev1 and γ1 ∈ hSv1 i such that γ1 e1 = e, and
αe ∈ SE with αe .v2 ∈ V0 . Then αe γ1−1 .(v2 , . . . , vn ) is a path of length n − 1 joining V0 to a
point in G′ v, a contradiction.

Proof of Theorem 7.1. Given G1 , G2 two hyperbolic groups, compute (by Gerasimov’s algo-
rithm) a reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition Γ1 for G1 . By Lemma 7.5, compute a
finite set V0 of representatives of reduced Stallings-Dunwoody decompositions for G2 modulo
Out(G2 ). Then, by Lemma 7.3, one can check whether Γ1 is isomorphic (as a graph of group
decomposition) to a decomposition Γ2 ∈ V0 . This is enough to conclude whether the two
groups are isomorphic or not.
    In order to compute a generating set of Out(G), we look at the action of Out(G) on D.
We use Lemma 7.5 a finite set V0 ⊂ V (D) of representatives of Out(G)-orbits in V (D). By
Lemma 7.3, for each T ∈ V0 , we can compute a finite generating set ST of the stabiliser of T .
For each T ∈ V0 , we use Lemma 7.4 to compute a finite set ET of oriented edges originating
at v, with OutT (G).ET = Lk(T ). By Lemma 7.3, for each edge e = {T, T ′ } ∈ ET , one can
compute an element αe ∈ Out(G) sending T ′ into V0 . By connectedness of D, Lemma 7.7
gives us a generating set of Out(G).


8    Whitehead problems
The goal of this section is to give a solution of the extended isomorphism problem for hyper-
bolic groups with marked peripheral structure, and to deduce solutions of some Whitehead
problems.

Theorem 8.1. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for the class of hyperbolic
groups with marked peripheral structure. More precisely, there is an algorithm that takes
as input two hyperbolic groups with marked peripheral structure (G, P), (G′ , P ′ ), and decides
whether (G, P) ≃ (G′ , P ′ ).
    There is an another algorithm which takes as input a hyperbolic group with marked pe-
ripheral structure (G, P), and gives a generating set of Outm (G, P).

   Restricting to finite or virtually cyclic subgroups, we can as well solve the unmarked
isomorphism problem:

Corollary 8.2. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for the class of hyperbolic
groups with unmarked peripheral structures with virtually cyclic or finite peripheral subgroups.

Proof. This follows from Theorem 8.1 and Lemma 2.13.

                                                    64
    Before proving the theorem, we first give a few applications. We consider the following
versions of the Whitehead problem:
    Given a hyperbolic group G and two families of elements g1 , . . . gn , and h1 , . . . , hn ,

(W1) is there an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) such that ϕ(gi ) = hi ?

(W2) is there an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) such that ϕ(gi ) is conjugate to hi ?

(W3) is there an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) such that hϕ(gi )i = hhi i ?

(W4) is there is an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) such that hϕ(gi )i is conjugate to hhi i ?

Corollary 8.3. Whitehead problems (W1), (W2), (W3) and (W4) have a uniform solution
in hyperbolic groups.

   The uniformity means that one algorithm works for all hyperbolic groups, taking a pre-
sentation of the group as input.

Proof. Consider a hyperbolic group G and two families of elements g1 , . . . gn , and h1 , . . . , hn .
     Problem (W1) asks about the existence of an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) such that ϕ(gi ) =
hi . Consider the tuples S = (g1 , . . . , gn ), S ′ = (h1 , . . . , hn ), and P = ((S)), P ′ = ((S ′ )) the
corresponding marked peripheral structures with one peripheral subgroup. By the solution
of the marked isomorphism problem, we can decide whether there exists ϕ and g such that
ϕ(gi ) = hgi . This is equivalent to (W1).
     Problem (W2) asks about the existence of an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) such that ϕ(gi )
is conjugate to hi . Consider the 1-tuples Si = (gi ), Si′ = (hi ), and P = (S1 , . . . , Sn ), P ′ =
(S1′ , . . . , Sn′ ). Then the existence of ϕ as in (W2) is equivalent to the fact that (G, P) ≃ (G, P ′ ).
     Problem (W3), ask about the existence of an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(G) such that
hϕ(gi )i = hhi i. For each cyclic group hgi i (finite or infinite), one can compute all possi-
ble si with hsi i = hgi i. For each such choice, (W1) tells us if there is ϕ sending si to hi . There
exists such a ϕ for some choice if and only if (W3) has a positive answer.
     Finally, Problem (W4) is just an instance of the unmarked isomorphism problem with
cyclic (maybe finite) peripheral subgroups, and is solved by application of Corollary 8.2.

    Let Fn be a free group. McCool’s theorem [McC75] gives an algorithm to compute, given
a finite subset X ⊂ Fn , a finite presentation of the stabiliser of X in Aut(Fn ).
    Because we have a solution of the extended isomorphism problem, we have the following
(generalised but weaker) version of McCool’s Theorem [McC75]:

Corollary 8.4. There exists an algorithm that takes as input a hyperbolic group G, and
g1 , . . . , gn ∈ G, and which outputs a finite generating set of

    • the subgroup of Aut(G) fixing the conjugacy classes of g1 , . . . , gn

    • the subgroup of Aut(G) fixing g1 , . . . , gn

Proof. By Theorem 8.1, one can compute a generating set of Outm (G, ((g1 ), . . . , (gn )). Choos-
ing representatives in Aut(G), and adding a generating set of inner automorphisms answers
the first problem.
    For the second problem, compute a generating set S of Outm (G, ((g1 , . . . , gn )) where the
peripheral structure consists of one peripheral tuple. For each α ∈ S, consider α̃ ∈ Aut(G)

                                                    65
representing α, and modify α̃ by an inner automorphism so that α̃ fixes g1 , . . . , gn . Let S̃ be
the obtained lifts of generators. Compute SZ a generating set of the centraliser of (g1 , . . . , gn );
if the group they generate is elementary, this follows from Lemmas 2.5 and 2.8; otherwise, this
centraliser is finite, and one can compute this centraliser by solving, for each representative F
of the conjugacy classes of finite groups, the system of equations with unknown g saying F g
commutes with g1 , . . . , gn ; the largest finite group F g obtained is the centraliser. Viewing SZ
as a set of inner automorphisms, then S̃ ∪ SZ is a generating set of the stabiliser of (g1 , . . . , gn )
in Aut(G).

   We now give the proof of the main result of this section, solving the extended isomorphism
problem for hyperbolic groups with marked peripheral structures. This will deduced from the
absolute case using a standard filling method.

Proof of Theorem 8.1. Obviously, we can assume that no peripheral subgroup is trivial. Write
P = (S1 , . . . , Sn ), and let Ti be the the family of elements of Si together with the products
of all pairs of elements of Si . The point of introducing Ti is that if all elements of Ti are
elliptic in a G-tree, then by Serre’s Lemma, the group hSi i = hTi i fixes a point in this tree.
Similarly, write P ′ = (S1′ , . . . , Sn′ ) and define Ti′ analogously. This defines enlarged peripheral
structures Q = (T1 , . . . , Tn ) and Q′ = (T1′ , . . . , Tn′ ) of G and G′ . Note that (G, P) ≃ (G′ , P ′ )
if and only if (G, Q) ≃ (G′ , Q′ ).
     Write Ti = (ti,1 , . . . , ti,pi ). For each ti,j ∈ Ti of infinite order, choose Ri,j a torsion
free one-ended hyperbolic group without cyclic splitting and choose τi,j a generator of some
maximal cyclic group of Ri,j (we allow the groups Ri,j to be isomorphic to each other, so
we can give once and for all a presentation of such a group to our algorithm). Define Ĝ as
the multiple amalgam G(∗hti,j i Ri,j )i,j where one identifies ti,j with τi,j . Denote by Λ this
decomposition of Ĝ. Consider Ri,j        ′ an isomorphic copy of R , τ ′ the copy of τ , and define
                                                                       i,j   i,j            i,j
Ĝ′ = G′ (∗ht′i,j i Ri,j
                     ′ )
                         i,j analogously.    By Bestvina-Feighn’s    combination  theorem,  Ĝ and Ĝ′ are
hyperbolic groups [BF92].
     Clearly, if (G, Q) ≃ (G′ , Q′ ), then there is an isomorphism ϕ : Ĝ → Ĝ′ sending Ri,j to a
conjugate of Ri,j   ′ , and sending each tuple T to a conjugate of T ′ . We prove that the converse
                                                     i                     i
is true under one-endedness assumptions.
Lemma 8.5. Assume that Ĝ and Ĝ′ are one-ended. Assume that there is an isomorphism
ϕ : Ĝ → Ĝ′ sending Ri,j to a conjugate of Ri,j
                                             ′ , and sending T to a conjugate of T ′ .
                                                              i                   i
                      ′   ′
    Then (G, Q) ≃ (G , Q ).

Proof. Let G = π1 (Γ) be a Z-JSJ decomposition of G relative to Q. Let Γ̂ be a decomposition
of Ĝ obtained from Λ by blowing up its central vertex using Γ. Using the same argument as
[GL09, Lemma 7.31], we see that Γ̂ is a Z-JSJ decomposition of Ĝ.
    Let Tc be the tree of cylinders of the Bass-Serre tree of Γ̂. Note that the vertices Ri,j are
terminal vertices of Tc /Γ. Let R̃ ⊂ Tc be the set of points stabilised by a conjugate of some
Ri,j . Then Tc \ R̃ has only one orbit of connected components, and G is the stabiliser of one
of them. The analogous facts hold for the analogous tree Tc′ . Since Tc and Tc′ are canonical,
there exists a ϕ-equivariant map f : Tc → Tc′ . Since ϕ maps each Ri,j to a conjugate of Ri,j  ′ ,

f maps R̃ to R̃′ , so ϕ(G) is conjugate to G′ , and changing ϕ by an inner automorphism, we
can assume that ϕ(G) = G′ .
    By hypothesis, the tuple ϕ(Ti ) ⊂ G′ is conjugate in Ĝ to Ti′ ⊂ G′ . We claim that ϕ(Ti ) is
conjugate to Ti′ in G. Indeed, let g ∈ Ĝ be such that ϕ(Ti )g = Ti′ . Consider Λ̃′ the Bass-Serre

                                                    66
tree of Λ′ , and u ∈ Λ̃ the vertex fixed by G′ . Then hϕ(Ti )i and hTi′ i both fix the vertex u ∈ Λ′ ,
so Ti′ fixes both u and g−1 u. But hti,j i being malnormal in Ri,j , we see that any segment of
length 2 in Γ̃′ has trivial stabiliser. Since we assumed hTi i 6= 1, we get u = g −1 u, and g ∈ G.
This proves that ϕ(Ti ) is conjugate to Ti′ in G, and concludes that ϕ induces an isomorphism
between (G, Q) and (G′ , Q′ ).

Lemma 8.6. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for groups (G, P) with marked
peripheral structures, relatively one-ended.

Proof. We need to decide the existence of ϕ : Ĝ → Ĝ′ as in Lemma 8.5. First, since we have
a solution to the isomorphism problem (without peripheral structure), we can assume that
Ĝ ≃ Ĝ′ . Because Ri,j is the stabiliser of a rigid vertex of a Z-JSJ decomposition of Ĝ, the
orbit of the conjugacy class [Ri,j ] of Ri,j under the action of Out(Ĝ) is finite.
    We claim that the orbit of Out(Ĝ) on the conjugacy class [Ti ] of Ti is finite. Indeed,
all elements of Ti are elliptic in any Z-splitting of Ĝ, so hTi i is Z-universally elliptic. In
particular, it fixes a point v in Γ̂. If v is flexible, then it is a hanging bounded Fuchsian group
without reflection, and since hTi i is Z-universally elliptic, it is either finite or conjugate into
a boundary subgroup of Gv ([GL09]). In each case, the claim follows easily. If v is rigid, all
automorphisms in some finite index subgroup of Out(Ĝ) coincide with an inner automorphism
on Gv , so the claim follows in this case too. We have proved that the Out(Ĝ)-orbits of all
[Ri,j ] and [Ti ] is finite.
    One can decide whether two quasiconvex subgroups are conjugate: one can compute an
automaton representing them as quasi-isometrically embeddable rational subsets by [Kap96,
Proposition 1], and one can decide whether there exists g ∈ G such that g−1 S1 g ⊂ hS2 i
and gS2 g −1 ⊂ hS1 i using solvability of systems of quasi-isometrically embeddable rational
constraints (Theorem 2.7).
    One can also decide whether two tuples of elements are conjugate, therefore one can apply
Lemma 2.1 and decide whether there exists α ∈ Out(Ĝ) such that f ◦ α([Ri,j ]) = [Ri,j       ′ ] and

f ◦ α([Ti ]) = [Ti ]. By the claim above, this allows us to decide whether (G, Q) ≃ (G , Q′ ).
                    ′                                                                      ′

    Lemma 2.1 also gives a set of generators for the subgroup Out0 (Ĝ) that preserves the con-
jugacy class of each Ri,j and of each Ti . We saw that restriction to G defines an epimorphism
Out0 (Ĝ) ։ Outm (G, Q). This gives a generating set for Outm (G, Q), as desired.


    Now we treat the case where Ĝ is not one-ended. By Lemma 2.14, we can assume that
all peripheral subgroups are infinite.
Lemma 8.7. One can compute a relative Stallings-Dunwoody decomposition of (G, P).

Proof. We note that G is one-ended relative to P if and only if Ĝ is one-ended. Using
Gerasimov’s algorithm, this decide allows us to decide whether (G, P) is relatively one-ended.
If it is, we are done. If it is not, one can enumerate by Tietze transformations all presentations
of G. We need to recognise among them which correspond to splittings of G over a finite
group relative to P. One can proceed as follows. One can first easily recognise presentations
on which one can read a splitting over finite groups.
     Since vertex groups are quasiconvex, one can compute an automaton representing them
as quasi-isometrically embeddable rational subsets by [Kap96, Proposition 1]. Then, one can
check whether the tuples of P can each be conjugated into a vertex group, by solving an


                                                 67
explicit system of equations with quasi-isometrically embeddable constraints (Theorem 2.7).
This determines whether the considered presentation corresponds to a splitting of G over a
finite group relative to P.
    Then, we can look at a vertex group Gv of this decomposition, compute its peripheral
structure induced by P, and iterate this procedure. This will stop by Dunwoody’s accessibility.
When it stops, we have a decomposition of (G, P) over finite groups such that vertex group
don’t split over finite groups relative to the peripheral subgroups they contain.

   The following Lemma concludes the proof of Theorem 8.1.
Lemma 8.8. The extended isomorphism problem is solvable for hyperbolic groups with marked
peripheral structures whose peripheral subgroups are infinite.

Proof. The proof is similar to the argument in Section 7. We define D the deformation space
of Stallings-Dunwoody decompositions of G relative to P. As in Lemma 7.2, D/Outm (G, P) is
finite. Indeed, we view each element of D/Outm (G, P) as a graph of groups where each vertex
group Γv has a marked peripheral structure Pv . Since, D is connected by slides, the vertex
groups (Γv , Pv ) with their marked peripheral structure don’t depend on the decomposition
considered. Since each Γv has finitely many conjugacy classes of finite groups, there are only
finitely many graph of groups that can be constructed from the given (Γv , Pv ).
    By Lemma 8.6, we have a solution to the extended isomorphism problem for vertex groups
with marked peripheral structure (Γv , Pv ).
    Since peripheral subgroups are infinite, they don’t fix any edge, so we can apply Lemma
2.29 and 2.30 to decide whether two decompositions are in the same orbit under Outm (G, P).
Therefore, Lemmas 7.4 and 7.5 still apply. This allows us to decide whether (G, P) ≃ (G′ , P ′ )
so we can solve the extended isomorphism problem as in Theorem 7.1.

   Theorem 8.1 is now proved.


References
[Ady55] S. I. Adyan. Algorithmic unsolvability of problems of recognition of certain prop-
        erties of groups. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.), 103:533–535, 1955.

[AB87]    Roger Alperin and Hyman Bass. Length functions of group actions on Λ-trees.
          In Combinatorial group theory and topology (Alta, Utah, 1984), pages 265–378.
          Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1987.

[Bah05] Patrick Bahls. The isomorphism problem in Coxeter groups. Imperial College Press,
        London, 2005.

[Bas93]   Hyman Bass. Covering theory for graphs of groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 89(1-
          2):3–47, 1993.

[BJ96]    Hyman Bass and Renfang Jiang. Automorphism groups of tree actions and of graphs
          of groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 112(2):109–155, 1996.




                                              68
[BGS85] Gilbert Baumslag, Dion Gildenhuys, and Ralph Strebel. Algorithmically insoluble
        problems about finitely presented solvable groups, Lie and associative algebras. II.
        J. Algebra, 97(1):278–285, 1985.

[BF92]    M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. A combination theorem for negatively curved groups.
          J. Differential Geom., 35(1):85–101, 1992.

[Bes88]   Mladen Bestvina. Degenerations of the hyperbolic space. Duke Math. J., 56(1):143–
          161, 1988.

[BF91a] Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Bounding the complexity of simplicial group
        actions on trees. Invent. Math., 103(3):449–469, 1991.

[BF91b] Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Bounding the complexity of simplicial group
        actions on trees. Invent. Math., 103(3):449–469, 1991.

[Boo57]   William W. Boone. Certain simple, unsolvable problems of group theory. V, VI.
          Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A. 60 = Indag. Math., 19:22–27, 227–232, 1957.

[Bow98] Brian H. Bowditch. Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic groups. Acta
        Math., 180(2):145–186, 1998.

[BH99]    Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, vol-
          ume 319 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Prin-
          ciples of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.

[Bro82]   Kenneth S. Brown. Cohomology of groups, volume 87 of Graduate Texts in Mathe-
          matics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1982.

[Chi69]   D. R. J. Chillingworth. A finite set of generators for the homeotopy group of a
          non-orientable surface. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 65:409–430, 1969.

[CF08]    Matt Clay and Max Forester. On the isomorphism problem for generalized
          Baumslag-Solitar groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 8(4):2289–2322, 2008.

[CDP]     Michel Coornaert, Thomas Delzant, Athanase Papadopoulos. Géométrie et théorie
          des groupes. Les groupes hyperboliques de Gromov. Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
          1441. Berlin etc.: Springer-Verlag. x, 165 p. DM 30.00 (1990).

[CM87]    Marc Culler and John W. Morgan. Group actions on R-trees. Proc. London Math.
          Soc. (3), 55(3):571–604, 1987.

[DG08a] François Dahmani and Daniel Groves. Detecting free splittings in relatively hyper-
        bolic groups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 360(12):6303–6318, 2008.

[DG08b] François Dahmani and Daniel Groves. The isomorphism problem for toral relatively
        hyperbolic groups. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci., (107):211–290, 2008.

[DG09]    François Dahmani and Vincent Guirardel. Foliations for solving equations in groups:
          free, virtually free and hyperbolic groups. arXiv:0901.1830 [math.GR]. Journal of
          Topology, to appear., 2009.



                                              69
[Del96]   Thomas Delzant. Sous-groupes distingués et quotients des groupes hyperboliques.
          Duke Math. J., 83(3):661–682, 1996.

[Dun85] M. J. Dunwoody. The accessibility of finitely presented groups. Invent. Math.,
        81(3):449–457, 1985.

[DS99]    M. J. Dunwoody and M. E. Sageev. JSJ-splittings for finitely presented groups over
          slender groups. Invent. Math., 135(1):25–44, 1999.

[FP06]    K. Fujiwara and P. Papasoglu. JSJ-decompositions of finitely presented groups and
          complexes of groups. Geom. Funct. Anal., 16(1):70–125, 2006.

[Fuj02]   Koji Fujiwara. On the outer automorphism group of a hyperbolic group. Israel J.
          Math., 131:277–284, 2002.

[Ger]     V. Gerasimov. Detecting connectedness of the boundary of a hyperbolic group.
          unpublished.

[Gro87]   M. Gromov. Hyperbolic groups. In Essays in group theory, volume 8 of Math. Sci.
          Res. Inst. Publ., pages 75–263. Springer, New York, 1987.

[GS80]    Fritz Grunewald and Daniel Segal. Some general algorithms. II. Nilpotent groups.
          Ann. of Math. (2), 112(3):585–617, 1980.

[Gui00]   Vincent Guirardel. Reading small actions of a one-ended hyperbolic group on R-
          trees from its JSJ splitting. Amer. J. Math., 122(4):667–688, 2000.

[Gui08]   Vincent Guirardel. Actions of finitely generated groups on R-trees. Ann. Inst.
          Fourier (Grenoble), 58(1):159–211, 2008.

[GL07]    Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. Deformation spaces of trees. Groups Geom.
          Dyn., 1(2):135–181, 2007.

[GL08]    Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. Trees of cylinders and canonical splittings.
          arXiv:0811.2383 [math.GR], 2008.

[GL09]    Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. JSJ decompositions: definitions, existence
          and uniqueness. I: The JSJ deformation space. arXiv:0911.3173 [math.GR], 2009.

[HL74]    P. J. Higgins and R. C. Lyndon. Equivalence of elements under automorphisms of
          a free group. J. London Math. Soc. (2), 8:254–258, 1974.

[Kap96] Ilya Kapovich. Detecting quasiconvexity: algorithmic aspects. In Geometric
        and computational perspectives on infinite groups (Minneapolis, MN and New
        Brunswick, NJ, 1994), volume 25 of DIMACS Ser. Discrete Math. Theoret. Comput.
        Sci., pages 91–99. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1996.

[Kha81] Olga Kharlampovich. A finitely presented solvable group with non-solvable word
        problem. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Ser. Mat. 45, 852-873 (1981).

[Kor02]   Mustafa Korkmaz. Mapping class groups of nonorientable surfaces. Geom. Dedicata,
          89:109–133, 2002.


                                            70
[Lev05a] Gilbert Levitt. Automorphisms of hyperbolic groups and graphs of groups. Geom.
         Dedicata, 114:49–70, 2005.
[Lev05b] Gilbert Levitt. Characterizing rigid simplicial actions on trees. In Geometric meth-
         ods in group theory, volume 372 of Contemp. Math., pages 27–33. Amer. Math. Soc.,
         Providence, RI, 2005.
[LV00]    Gilbert Levitt and Karen Vogtmann. A Whitehead algorithm for surface groups.
          Topology, 39(6):1239–1251, 2000.
[Lic64]   W. B. R. Lickorish. A finite set of generators for the homeotopy group of a 2-
          manifold. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 60:769–778, 1964.
[Lys89]   I. G. Lysënok. Some algorithmic properties of hyperbolic groups. Izv. Akad. Nauk
          SSSR Ser. Mat., 53(4):814–832, 912, 1989.
[MH75]    C. Maclachlan and W. J. Harvey. On mapping-class groups and Teichmüller spaces.
          Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 30(part 4):496–512, 1975.
[MKS04] Wilhelm Magnus, Abraham Karrass, and Donald Solitar. Combinatorial group
        theory. Dover Publications Inc., Mineola, NY, second edition, 2004. Presentations
        of groups in terms of generators and relations.
[McC75] James McCool. Some finitely presented subgroups of the automorphism group of a
        free group. J. Algebra, 35:205–213, 1975.
[MNS99] C. F. Miller, III, Walter D. Neumann, and G. A. Swarup. Some examples of hy-
        perbolic groups. In Geometric group theory down under (Canberra, 1996), pages
        195–202. de Gruyter, Berlin, 1999.
[Mil71]   Charles F. Miller, III. On group-theoretic decision problems and their classification.
          Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1971. Annals of Mathematics Studies,
          No. 68.
[MS84]    John W. Morgan and Peter B. Shalen. Valuations, trees, and degenerations of
          hyperbolic structures. I. Ann. of Math. (2), 120(3):401–476, 1984.
[New68] B. B. Newman. Some results on one-relator groups. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 74:568–
        571, 1968.
[Nov52]   P. S. Novikov. On algorithmic unsolvability of the problem of identity. Doklady
          Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.), 85:709–712, 1952.
[Pap96]   P. Papasoglu. An algorithm detecting hyperbolicity. In Geometric and computa-
          tional perspectives on infinite groups (Minneapolis, MN and New Brunswick, NJ,
          1994), volume 25 of DIMACS Ser. Discrete Math. Theoret. Comput. Sci., pages
          193–200. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1996.
[Pau88]   Frédéric Paulin. Topologie de Gromov équivariante, structures hyperboliques et
          arbres réels. Invent. Math., 94(1):53–80, 1988.
[Pau89]   Frédéric Paulin. The Gromov topology on R-trees. Topology Appl., 32(3):197–221,
          1989.

                                              71
[Pie74]   Alfred Pietrowski. The isomorphism problem for one-relator groups with non-trivial
          centre. Math. Z., 136:95–106, 1974.

[Pri77]   Stephen J. Pride. The isomorphism problem for two-generator one-relator groups
          with torsion is solvable. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 227:109–139, 1977.

[Rab58] Michael O. Rabin. Recursive unsolvability of group theoretic problems. Ann. of
        Math. (2), 67:172–194, 1958.

[Seg90]   Dan Segal. Decidable properties of polycyclic groups. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 61(3),
          497-528 (1990).

[Sco83]   Peter Scott. The geometries of 3-manifolds. Bull. London Math. Soc., 15(5):401–
          487, 1983.

[Sel95]   Z. Sela. The isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups. I. Ann. of Math. (2),
          141(2):217–283, 1995.

[Sel97]   Z. Sela. Structure and rigidity in (Gromov) hyperbolic groups and discrete groups
          in rank 1 Lie groups. II. Geom. Funct. Anal., 7(3):561–593, 1997.

[Ser77]   Jean-Pierre Serre. Arbres, amalgames, SL2 . Société Mathématique de France, Paris,
          1977. Rédigé avec la collaboration de Hyman Bass, Astérisque, No. 46.

[Whi36] J. H. C. Whitehead. On equivalent sets of elements in a free group. Ann. of Math.
        (2), 37(4):782–800, 1936.

[Zim85]   Bruno Zimmermann.         Zur Klassifikation höherdimensionaler Seifertscher
          Faserräume. In Low-dimensional topology (Chelwood Gate, 1982), volume 95 of
          London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 214–255. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
          bridge, 1985.




                                              72
